{"id": "25187", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25187", "title": "History of Qatar", "text": "History of Qatar\n\nThe history of Qatar spans from its first duration of human occupation to its formation as a modern state. Human occupation of Qatar dates back to 50,000 years ago, and Stone Age encampments and tools have been unearthed in the peninsula. Mesopotamia was the first civilization to have a presence in the area during the Neolithic period, evidenced by the discovery of potsherds originating from the Ubaid period near coastal encampments.\n\nThe peninsula fell under the domain of several different empires during its early years of settlement, including the Seleucid, the Parthians and the Sasanians. In 628 AD, the population was introduced to Islam after Muhammad sent an envoy to Munzir ibn Sawa who was the Sasanid governor of Eastern Arabia. It became a pearl trading center by the 8th century. The Abbasid era saw the rise of several settlements. After the Bani Utbah and other Arab tribes conquered Bahrain in 1783, the Al Khalifa imposed their authority over Bahrain and mainland Qatar. Over the proceeding centuries, Qatar was a site of contention between the Wahhabi of Najd and the Al Khalifa. The Ottomans expanded their empire into Eastern Arabia in 1871, withdrawing from the area in 1915 after the beginning of World War I.\n\nIn 1916, Qatar became a British protectorate and Abdullah Al Thani signed a treaty stipulating that he could only cede territory to the British in return for protection from all aggression by sea and support in case of a land attack. A 1934 treaty granted more extensive protection. In 1935, a 75-year oil concession was granted to the Qatar Petroleum Company and high-quality oil was discovered in 1940 in Dukhan.\n\nDuring the 1950s and 1960s, increasing oil revenues brought prosperity, rapid immigration, substantial social progress, and the beginnings of the country's modern history. After Britain announced a policy of ending the treaty relationships with the Persian Gulf sheikdoms in 1968, Qatar joined the other eight states then under British protection in a plan to form a federation of Arab emirates. By mid-1971, as the termination date of the British treaty relationship approached, the nine still had not agreed on terms of union. Accordingly, Qatar declared its independence on September 3, 1971. In June 1995, deputy emir Hamad bin Khalifa deposed his father Khalifa bin Hamad in a bloodless coup. The emir permitted more liberal press and municipal elections as a precursor to parliamentary elections. A new constitution was approved via public referendum in April 2003 and came into effect in June 2005.\n\nArchaeological evidence has dated human occupation in the Qatar Peninsula to 50,000 years in the past, when small groups of Stone Age inhabitants built seasonal encampments and sites for working flint. At this time, the Persian Gulf was a dry-land river valley. The modern-day territory of Qatar was not peninsular and did not contain any relief, but was instead a part of the contiguous landmass stretching from Arabia to the Persian Gulf. As a result, it was probably only used as a winter grazing zone for hunter-gatherers who favored the more fertile land of the Persian Gulf valley.\n\nIn 1961, a Danish archaeological expedition carried out on the peninsula uncovered approximately 30,000 stone implements from 122 paleolithic sites. Most of the sites were situated along the coastline, and were divided into four separate cultural groups based on flint typology. Macrolithic tools such as scrapers, arrowheads and hand axes dating to the lower and middle paleolithic periods were among the discoveries.\n\nThe flooding of the Persian Gulf, which occurred 8,000 years ago, resulted in the displacement of Persian Gulf inhabitants, and the occupation of Qatar to capitalize on its coastal resources. From this time onward, Qatar was regularly used as rangeland for nomadic tribes from the Najd and Al Hasa regions in Saudi Arabia, and a number of seasonal encampments were constructed around sources of water.\n\nThe earliest settlements on the peninsula are dated to the Neolithic period. A site on the northwest coast called Wadi Debayan is one of the oldest known settlements in Qatar. Marine life remains, plant material and structural components were among the artifacts excavated. Carbon dating of organic remains revealed human habitation dating back to 7,500 years in the past. Fragments of pottery originating from the early Ubaid period (the period of Mesopotamia which transpired from ca. 6500 to 3800 BC) were also recovered. One of the earliest settlements found in the southern portion of Qatar is known as Shagra and dates back to 6000 BC. A two-room structure, flints and remnants of fish and molluscs were found at the site.\nPottery originating from the later Ubaid period were uncovered in the peninsula in three separate expeditions during the 1970s and 1980s. Microprobe analyses carried out on the potsherds deduced that they originated from the southern region of Mesopotamia. Owing to the fact that the Qatari Peninsula would not have accommodated the necessary conditions for a pottery-making civilization to flourish, it has been hypothesized that the pottery was produced in Ur and traded down the Persian Gulf settlements. As there is a distinct absence of pottery in overland routes, it is believed that trading was primarily facilitated by sea routes.\n\nAl Da'asa, a settlement located on the northeast coast of Qatar, is the most extensive Ubaid site in the country. It was excavated by a Danish team in 1961. The site is theorized to have accommodated a small seasonal encampment, possibly a lodging for a hunting-fishing-gathering group who made recurrent visits. This is evidenced by the discovery of nearly sixty fire pits at the site, which may have been used to cure and dry fish, in addition to flint tools such as scrapers, cutters, blades and arrow heads. Furthermore, many painted Ubaid potsherds and a carnelian bead were found in the fire pits, suggesting overseas connections.\n\nIn an excavation done in Al Khor in 1977–78, several Ubaid-period graves were uncovered in what is considered the earliest recorded burial site in the country. One grave contained the cremated remains of a young woman with no grave goods. Eight other graves contained grave goods, including beads made of shell, carnelian and obsidian. The obsidian most likely originated from Najran in south west Arabia.\n235\n\nThe Qatari Peninsula was close enough to the Dilmun civilization in Bahrain to have felt its influence. Barbar pottery was excavated in two sites by the Qatar Archaeology Project, evidencing the country's involvement in Dilmun's trade network. When the people of Dilmun began engaging in maritime activities around 2100 to 1700 BC, the inhabitants of Qatar started diving for pearls in the Persian Gulf. The Qataris were engaged in the trading of pearls and date palms during this era.\n\nIt has been argued that the remains of Dilmun settlements found in Qatar do not represent major evidence of long-term human habitation. Qatar remained largely uninhabited during this period due to regular migration by nomadic Arab tribes searching for untapped sources food and water. The settlements dating to the Dilmun period, particularly in Al Khor Island, may have been established to expedite trade journeys between Bahrain to the closest significant settlement in the Persian Gulf, Tell Abraq. Another scenario entails that the encampments were created by visiting fishermen or pearl fishers from Dilmun. It has also been suggested that the presence of pottery is indicative of trade between the inhabitants of Qatar and the Dilmun civilization, though this is considered unlikely due to the scarce population of the peninsula during this period.\n\nKassite Babylonian-influenced materials dating back to the second millennium BC, which were found in Al Khor Island, reveal evidence of trade relations between the inhabitants of Qatar and the Kassite. Among the findings were 3,000,000 crushed snail shells and Kassite potsherds. It has been asserted that Qatar was the site of the earliest known production of shellfish dye owing to a purple dye industry operated by the Kassite which existed on the island. The dye was obtained from the Murex snail and was known as \"Tyrian purple\". Dye production may have been supervised by the Kassite administration in Bahrain with the purpose of exporting the dye to Mesopotamia.\n\nAssyrian king Esarhaddon led a successful campaign against \"Bazu\", an area which encompassed Dilmun and Qatar, in c. 680 BC. To date, no archaeological evidence of early Iron Age settlements have been discovered in the Peninsula. This is likely due to adverse climatic changes rendering Qatar less inhabitable during this period.\n\nIn the 5th century BC, Greek historian Herodotus published the earliest known description of the population of Qatar, describing its inhabitants as 'sea-faring Canaanites'.\n\nAround 325 BC, Alexander the Great sent his top admiral, Androsthenes of Thasos, to survey the entire Persian Gulf. The requested charts arrived shortly after Alexander died in 323. Seleucus I Nicator was awarded the eastern part of the Ancient Greek Empire after Alexander's death. Starting from 312, he expanded the Seleucid Empire eastward of Babylon, purportedly encompassing parts of Eastern Arabia. Archaeological evidence of Greek-influenced materials has been discovered in Qatar. Excavations north of Dukhan uncovered potsherds of Selucid characteristic, and a cairnfield consisting of 100 burial mounds dating to the era was discovered in Ras Abrouq. The relatively large number of cairns suggest a sizable sea-faring community prevailed in the area.\n\nAfter losing most of their territories in the Persian Gulf, Seleucid influence ceased in the area by c. 250 BC.\n\nFollowing the eviction of the Seleucid by the Parthian Empire in c. 250 BC, the latter gained dominion over the Persian Gulf and Arabian Coast. As the Parthians were dependent on trade routes through the Persian Gulf, they established garrisons along the coast. Pottery recovered from expeditions in Qatar has demonstrated links to the Parthian Empire.\n\nRas Abrouq, a coastal city north of Dukhan, housed a fishing station which foreign vessels used to dry fish in 140 BC. A number of stone structures and large quantities of fish bones were recovered from the site.\n\nPliny the Elder, a Roman author, wrote an account on the inhabitants of the peninsula around the mid-first century AD. He referred to them as the \"Catharrei\" and described them as nomads who constantly roamed in search of water and food. Around the second century, Ptolemy produced the first known map to depict the landmass, referring to it as \"Catura\".\n\nIn 224 AD, the Sasanian Empire gained control over the territories surrounding the Persian Gulf. Qatar played a role in the commercial activity of the Sasanids, contributing to at least two commodities: precious pearls and purple dye. Sasanid pottery and glassware were found in Mezru'ah, a city north-west of Doha, and fragments of glassware and pottery were discovered in a settlement in Umm al-Ma'a.\n\nUnder the Sasanid reign, many of the inhabitants in Eastern Arabia were introduced to Christianity after the religion was dispersed eastward by Mesopotamian Christians. Monasteries were constructed in Qatar during this era, and further settlements were founded. During the latter part of the Christian era, Qatar was known by the Syriac name 'Beth Qatraye' (ܒܝܬ ܩܛܪܝܐ; \"region of the Qataris\"). A variant of this was 'Beth Catara'. The region was not limited to Qatar; it also included Bahrain, Tarout Island, Al-Khatt, and Al-Hasa. The dioceses of Beth Qatraye did not form an ecclesiastical province, except for a short period during the mid-to-late seventh century. They were instead subject to the Metropolitan of Fars.\n\nMuhammad sent Al-Ala'a Al-Hadrami, a Muslim envoy, to a Persian ruler in Eastern Arabia named Munzir ibn Sawa Al Tamimi in 628 and requested that he and his people accept Islam. Munzir obliged his request and most Arab tribes in Qatar converted to Islam. It has been proposed by historian Habibur Rahman that Munzir ibn Sawa's seat of administration existed in the Murwab or Umm al-Ma'a area of Qatar. This theory is lent credence by an archaeological find of approximately 100 small stone-built Islamic-period houses and fortified palaces of a tribal leader in Murwab, which are thought to have originated from the early Islamic period. After the adoption of Islam, the Arabs led the Muslim conquest of Persia which resulted in the fall of the Sasanian Empire.\n\nIt is likely that some settled populations in Qatar did not immediately convert to Islam. Isaac of Nineveh, a 7th-century Syriac Christian bishop regarded as a saint in some churches, was born in Beth Qatraye. Other notable Christian scholars dating to this period who hailed from Beth Qatraye include , and Ahob of Qatar. In 674, the bishops of Beth Qatraye stopped attending synods.\n\nQatar was described as a famous horse and camel breeding centre during the Umayyad period. It began benefiting from its commercially strategic position in the Persian Gulf during the 8th century, going on to become a center of pearl trading.\n\nDuring the Second Fitna, a renowned Khariji commander named Qatari ibn al-Fuja'a, who was described as the most popular, admired and powerful Khariji leader, led the Azariqa, a sub-sect of the Khawarij, in to numerous battles. He held the title of Amir al-Mu'minin and ruled over the radical Azariqa movement for more than 10 years. Born in Al Khuwayr in Qatar, he also minted the first known Kharjite coins, the earliest of which dated to 688 or 689.\n\nThe Umayyad Caliphate brought about much political and religious change in western Asia starting from the late seventh century. As a result, there were many revolts against the Umayyad at the end of the seventh century, particularly in Qatar and Bahrain. Ibn al-Fuja'a led an uprising against the Umayyad caliphs for more than twenty years.\n\nIn 750, discontent in the caliphate had reached a critical level due to the treatment of non-Arab citizens in the Empire. The Abbasid Revolution resulted in the overthrow of the Umayyad Caliphate, ushering in the Abbasid period.\n\nSeveral settlements, including Murwab, were developed during the Abbasid period. Over 100 stone-built houses, two mosques, and an Abbasid fort were constructed in Murwab during this era. Murwab fort is the oldest intact fort in the country and was built over the ruins of a previous fort which was destroyed by fire. The town was the site of the first sizable settlement established off the coastal area of Qatar. A similar site, containing T'ang stoneware and dating to the 9th and 10th centuries, was discovered in Al Naman (north of Zubarah).\nSubstantial development in the pearling industry around the Qatari Peninsula occurred during the Abbasid era. Ships from Basra en route to India and China would make stops in the port of Qatar during this period. Chinese porcelain, West African coins and pieces from Thailand have been discovered in Qatar. Archaeological remains from the 9th century suggest that Qatar's inhabitants used greater wealth, perhaps from pearl trade, to construct higher quality homes and public buildings. However, when the caliphate's prosperity declined in Iraq, so too did it in Qatar.\n\nMost of Eastern Arabia, particularly Bahrain and the Qatari Peninsula, were sites of revolt against the Abbasid Caliphate around 868. Mohammed ibn Ali, a revolutionary, roused the people of Bahrain and Qatar into a rebellion, but the rebellion was unsuccessful and he relocated to Basra. He was later successful in instigating the Zanj Rebellion.\n\nA radical Isma'ili group called the Qarmatians established a utopian republic in Eastern Arabia in 899. They considered the pilgrimage to Mecca a superstition and once in control of the Bahraini state they launched raids along the pilgrim routes crossing the Arabian Peninsula. In 906 they ambushed the pilgrim caravan returning from Mecca and massacred 20,000 pilgrims.\n\nQatar is mentioned in 13th-century Muslim scholar Yaqut al-Hamawi's book, \"Mu'jam Al-Buldan (Dictionary of Countries)\", which alludes to the Qataris' fine striped woven cloaks and their skills in improvement and finishing of spears, known as khattiyah spears. The spears acquired their name as an homage to the region of Al-Khatt which encompassed present-day Qatif, Uqair and Qatar.\n\nMuch of Eastern Arabia was controlled by the Usfurids in 1253, but control of the region was later seized by the prince of Ormus in 1320. Qatar's pearls provided the kingdom with one of its main sources of income. The Portuguese defeated the Ormus by 1507 following the destruction of their fleet by Afonso de Albuquerque's forces. However, Albuquerque's captains grew rebellious and he was compelled to abandon the Ormus island. Ultimately, in 1515, King Manuel I killed Sultan Saifuddin's vizier Reis Hamed, pressuring the sultan to become a vassal of King Manuel.\n\nBahrain and mainland Qatar had been seized by the Portuguese in 1521. After the Portuguese claimed control, they constructed a series of fortresses along the Arabian Coast. However, there have been no significant Portuguese ruins found in Qatar. The Portuguese focused on creating a commercial empire in Eastern Arabia, and exported gold, silver, silks, cloves, amber, horses and pearls. The population of Al-Hasa submitted voluntarily to the rule of the Ottomans in 1550, preferring them to the Portuguese.\n\nAfter the Portuguese were expelled from the area in 1602 by the Dutch and British, the Ottomans saw little need to maintain a military presence in the Al-Hasa region. As a result, the Ottomans were expelled by the Bani Khalid in 1670.\n\nThe Al Bin Ali Tribe are the original descendants of Bani Utbah tribe being that they are the only tribe to carry and nurture the last name Al-Utbi in their Ownership's documents of Palm gardens in Bahrain as early as the year 1699 - 1111 Hijri. They are specifically descendants of their great grand father Ali Al-Utbi who is a descendant of their great grand father Utbah hence the name Bani Utbah which means sons of Utbah. Utbah is the great grandfather of the Bani Utbah which is a section of Khafaf from Bani Sulaim bin Mansoor from Mudhar from Adnan. The plural word for Al-Utbi is Utub and the name of the tribe is Bani Utbah.\n\nHaving expelled the Ottomans, the Bani Khalid held jurisdiction over Qatar from 1670 onward. In 1766, the Utub clans of Al Jalahma and Al Khalifa migrated from Kuwait to Zubarah in Qatar. By the time of their arrival in Zubarah, the Bani Khalid exercised weak power over Qatar, though the largest village was ruled by distant kin of the Bani Khalid. After the Persian Occupation of Basra in 1777 many merchants and families moved from Basra and Kuwait to Zubarah. The town became a thriving center of trade and pearling in the Persian Gulf region after this movement.\n\nThe Al Khalifa claimed Qatar and Bahrain by 1783, whereas Bani Khalid control of neighboring Al-Hasa officially came to an end in 1795.\n\nFollowing Persian aggression towards Zubarah, the Utub and other Arab tribes drove out the Persians from Bahrain in 1783. Al Jalahma seceded from the Utub alliance sometime before the Utub annexed Bahrain in 1783 and returned to Zubarah. This left the Al Khalifa tribe in undisputed possession of Bahrain, who then transferred their power base from Zubarah to Manama. They continued to exert authority over the mainland, and paid tribute to the Wahhabi to ward off challenges on Qatar. However, Qatar did not develop a centralized authority because the Al Khalifa oriented their focus towards Bahrain. As a result, Qatar went through many periods of 'transitory sheikhs', with the most notable being Rahmah ibn Jabir al-Jalahimah. By 1790, Zubarah was described as a safe heaven for merchants who enjoyed complete protection and no customs duties.\nThe town came under threat by the Wahhabi from 1780 onward due to the intermittent raids launched on the Bani Khalid strongholds in Al-Hasa. The Wahhabi speculated that the population of Zubarah would conspire against their regime with the help of the Bani Khalid. They also believed that its residents practiced teachings contrary to the Wahhabi doctrine, and regarded the town as an important gateway to the Persian Gulf. Saudi general Sulaiman ibn Ufaysan led a raid against the town in 1787. Five years later, a massive Wahhabi force conquered Al Hasa, forcing many refugees to flee to Zubarah. Wahhabi forces besieged Zubarah and several neighboring settlements in 1794 later as punishment for accommodating asylum seekers. The local chieftains were allowed to continue carrying out administrative tasks but were required to pay a tax.\n\nAfter defeating the Bani Khalid in 1795, the Wahhabi were attacked on two fronts. The Ottomans and Egyptians assaulted the western front, while the Al Khalifa in Bahrain and the Omanis launched an attack against the eastern front. The Wahhabi allied themselves with the Al Jalahmah tribe in Qatar, who proceeded to engage the Al Khalifa and Omanis on the eastern frontier.\n\nUpon being made aware of advancements by the Egyptians on the western frontier, in 1811, the Wahhabi amir reduced his garrisons in Bahrain and Zubarah in order to re-position his troops. Said bin Sultan of Muscat capitalized on this opportunity and attacked the Wahhabi garrisons in Bahrain and Zubarah. The fort in Zubarah was set ablaze and the Al Khalifa were effectively returned to power.\n\nBritain's desire for secure passage for East India Company ships led it to impose its own order in the Persian Gulf. An agreement known as the General Maritime Treaty was signed between the East India Company and the sheikhs of the coastal area (later to be known as the Trucial Coast) in 1820. It acknowledged British authority in the Persian Gulf and sought to end piracy and the slave trade. Bahrain became a party to the treaty, and it was assumed that Qatar, as a dependency, was also a party to it.\n\nA report compiled by Major Colebrook in 1820 gives the first descriptions of the major towns in Qatar. All of the coastal cities mentioned in his report were situated near the Persian Gulf pearl banks and had been practicing pearl fishing for millenniums. Until the late eighteenth century, all of the principal towns of Qatar including Al Huwaila, Fuwayrit, Al Bidda and Doha were situated on the east coast. Doha developed around the largest of these, Al Bidda. The population consisted of nomadic and settled Arabs and a significant proportion of slaves brought from East Africa. As punishment for piracy committed by the inhabitants of Doha, an East India Company vessel bombarded the town in 1821. They razed the town, forcing between 300 and 400 natives to flee.\n\nA survey carried out by the British in 1825 notes that Qatar did not have a central authority and was governed by local sheikhs. Doha was ruled by the Al-Buainain tribe. In 1828, a member of the Al-Buainain murdered a native of Bahrain, prompting the Bahraini sheikh to imprison the offender. The Al-Buainain tribe revolted, provoking the Al Khalifa to destroy their fort and expel them from Doha. The expulsion of the Al-Buainain granted the Al Khalifa more jurisdiction over Doha.\n\nDesiring to keep surveillance over the proceedings of the Wahhabi, Bahrain stationed a government official named Abdullah bin Ahmad Al-Khalifa on the coast of Qatar as early as 1833. Turning against the Bahrainis, he instigated the people of Al Huwailah to revolt against the Al Khalifa and open up a correspondence with the Wahhabi in 1835. Shortly after the revolt, a peace agreement was signed by both parties under the mediation of the son of the Sultan of Muscat. As part of the stipulations, Al Huwailah was demolished and its residents were removed to Bahrain. Nephews of Abdullah bin Ahmed almost immediately violated the agreement when they incited members of the Al Kuwari tribe to attack Al Huwailah, however.\n\nResidents of the peninsula were susceptible to skirmishes between the forces of the sheikh of Bahrain and the Egyptian military commander of Al-Hasa. At the end of 1839 or beginning of 1840, the governor of Al-Hasa dispatched troops to lay waste to Qatar following the refusal of the Al Nuaim tribe of Zubarah to pay the demanded tribute. The assassination of a governor in Hofuf prematurely ended the expedition before the forces could reach the country.\n\nIn 1847, Abdullah bin Ahmed Al Khalifa and a Qatari chief named Isa bin Tarif formed a coalition against Mohammed bin Khalifa, the ruler of Bahrain. In November, bin Khalifa landed in Al Khor with 500 troops and military support from the governors of Qatif and Al-Hasa. The opposition forces numbered 600 troops and were led by bin Tarif. On 17 November, a decisive battle, which came to be known as the Battle of Fuwayrit, took place between the coalition forces and the Bahraini forces. The coalition forces were defeated after bin Tarif and eighty of his men were killed. After he defeated the resistance troop, bin Khalifa demolished Al Bidda and moved its inhabitants to Bahrain. He sent his brother, Ali bin Khalifa, as an envoy to Al Bidda. However, he did not exercise any administrative powers, and local tribal leaders remained responsible for the internal affairs of Qatar.\n\nAfter having concocted a plan to invade Bahrain, the Wahhabi amir Faisal bin Turki left his headquarters in Najd with a platoon of troops in February 1851. Several offers of appeasement were made on behalf of Mohammed bin Khalifa, but these were met with rejection by Faisal. In anticipation of the impending invasion, Ali bin Khalifa moved to enlist military support in Qatar, but Mohammed bin Thani was persuaded to grant support to Faisal's forces when they reached Al Bidda in May. On June 8, forces loyal to Al Thani took possession of an important tower situated close to Ali bin Khalifa's residence in the Al Bidda Fort. This prompted Bahrain to initiate negotiations for a protective treaty with the British in an attempt to thwart Faisal's advances. They were initially unsuccessful in doing so, but the British reconsidered their position after receiving an intelligence report on the conflict and hastily situated a naval blockade in Manama. Accompanying a peace treaty on 25 July 1851, the sheikh of Bahrain agreed to pay a fee of 4,000 German krones in return for the restoration of the Bahraini-occupied Al Bidda Fort and the disassociation of the Wahhabi from the inhabitants of Qatar.\n\nIn a move which angered Mohammed bin Khalifa, Faisal bin Turki provided a safe haven for Abdullah bin Ahmed's sons in Dammam in 1852. Consequently, the Bahrainis attempted to drive away residents of Al Bidda and Doha who were suspected of being loyal to the Wahhabi by imposing an economic blockade on the inhabitants which prevented them from engaging in pearl hunting. The blockade continued until the end of the year. In February 1853, the Wahhabi began marching from Al-Hasa to Al Khor. After Bahrain received assurance from the Qatar that they would not cooperate with the Wahhabi forces if they crossed into their borders, they sent Ali bin Khalifa to the mainland to act as a collaborator with the local resistance. A British-mediated peace agreement was reached between the two parties in 1853.\n\nHostilities were provoked again after the Bahraini sheikh, in response to the harboring of Bahraini fugitives in Dammam, stopped paying tribute to the Wahhabi amir in 1859 and proceeded to instigate Qatari tribes to attack its subjects. Following threats made by Abdullah bin Faisal to attack Bahrain, the British navy dispatched a ship off the coast of Dammam to prevent any attacks. The situation escalated in May 1860 when Abdullah threatened to occupy the coast of Qatar until the annual tribute was paid. In May 1861, Bahrain signed a treaty with the British government in which the latter agreed to offer protection and recognize Qatar as a dependent of Bahrain. In February 1862, the treaty was ratified by the Indian government.\n\nProceeding the British involvement, the sway that the Al Khalifa tribe held over Qatar's affairs began declining. Mohammed bin Thani was described by Gifford Palgrave as the acknowledged governor of the Qatar Peninsula in 1863. Some of Al Wakrah's inhabitants were forced to vacate the town by the Bahraini sheikh in April 1863 due to alleged links with the Wahhabi. The town's chief, Mohammed Bu Kuwara, was taken into custody on a similar charge. In 1866, a report by the British revealed that Qatar was paying an annual zakat of 4,000 German krones to the Wahhabi, in encroachment of the 1861 British treaty. The report also contended that the Al Khalifa were taxing the people of Qatar for the same annual payment.\n\nIn June 1867, a representative of Mohammed Al Khalifa seized a Bedouin from Al Wakrah and deported him to Bahrain. Mohammed bin Thani demanded his release, but the representative refused. This prompted Mohammed bin Thani to expel him from Al Wakrah. Upon receiving news of this, Mohammed Al Khalifa released the Bedouin prisoner and expressed his desire of renewed peace talks. Jassim bin Mohammed Al Thani, the son of Mohammed bin Thani, traveled to Bahrain to negotiate on his behalf. He was imprisoned on arrival and a large number of ships and troops were soon sent to punish the people of Al Wakrah and Al Bidda. Abu Dhabi joined on Bahrain's behalf due to the conception that Al Wakrah served as a refuge for fugitives from Oman. Later that year, the combined forces sacked the two aforementioned Qatari cities with 2,000 men in what would come to be known as the Qatari–Bahraini War. A British record later stated: In June 1868, Qatari tribes retaliated against Bahrain and a battle ensued in which 60 boats were sunk and 1000 men were killed. Afterwards, the Bahraini sheikh agreed to free Jassim bin Mohammed in return for captured Bahraini prisoners.\n\nThe joint Bahraini-Abu Dhabi incursion and Qatari counterattack prompted the British political agent, Colonel Lewis Pelly, to impose a settlement in 1868. Pelly's mission to Bahrain and Qatar and the peace treaty that resulted were milestones in Qatar's history. It implicitly recognized the distinctness of Qatar from Bahrain and explicitly acknowledged the position of Mohammed bin Thani as an important representative of the Peninsula's tribes.\n\nThe Ottoman Empire expanded into Eastern Arabia in 1871. After establishing themselves on Al-Hasa coast, they advanced towards Qatar. Al Bidda soon came to serve as a base of operations for Bedouins harassing the Ottomans in the south, and Abdullah II Al-Sabah of Kuwait was sent to the town to secure a landing for the Ottoman troops. He brought with him four Ottoman flags for the most influential personages in Qatar. Mohammed bin Thani received and accepted one of the flags, but he sent it to Al Wakrah and continued hoisting the local flag above his house. Jassim bin Mohammed accepted a flag and flew it above his house. A third flag was given to Ali bin Abdul Aziz, the ruler of Al Khor.\n\nThe British reacted negatively to the Ottoman's advancements as they felt their interests were at stake. Receiving no response to their objections, the British gunboat Hugh Rose arrived in Qatar on 19 July 1871. After inspecting the situation, Sidney Smith, the assistant political resident in the Gulf, discovered that Qatar flew the flags willingly. To further add to their apprehension, Jassim bin Mohammed, who assumed his father's role during this period, authorized the Ottomans to send 100 troops and equipment to Al Bidda in December 1871. By January 1872, the Ottomans incorporated Qatar into their dominion. It was designated a province in Najd under the control of the sanjak of Najd. Jassim bin Mohammed was appointed as the Kaymakam (sub-governor) of the district, and most other Qataris were allowed to keep their positions in the new government.\nCharles Grant, the assistant political resident, falsely reported that the Ottomans sent a contingent of 100 troops from Qatif to Zubarah under the command of Hossein Effendi in August 1873. The sheikh of Bahrain reacted negatively to this because the Al Nuaim tribe which resided in Zubarah had signed a treaty agreeing to be subjects of his. Upon being confronted by the sheikh, Grant referred him to political resident Edward Ross. Ross informed the sheikh that he believed he had no right to protect tribes residing in Qatar. In September, the sheikh reiterated his sovereignty over the town and tribe. Grant replied by arguing that there was no special mention of the Al Nuaim or Zubarah in any treaties signed with Bahrain. A British government official concurred with his views, stating that the sheikh of Bahrain \"should, as far as practicable abstain from interfering in complications on the mainland.\"\n\nAnother chance arose for the Al Khalifa to renew their claim on Zubarah in 1874 after an opposition leader named Nasir bin Mubarak moved to Qatar. They believed that Mubarak, with the assistance of Jassim bin Mohammed, would target the Al Nuaim living in Zubarah as a prelude to an invasion. As a result, a contingent of Bahraini reinforcements were sent to Zubarah, much to the disapproval of the British who suggested that the sheikh was involving himself in complications. Edward Ross made it apparent that a government council decision advised the sheikh that he should not interfere in the affairs of Qatar. The Al Khalifa remained in consistent contact with the Al Nuaim, drafting 100 members of the tribe in their army and offering financial assistance. Jassim bin Mohammed expelled some members of the tribe after they attacked ships near Al Bidda in 1878.\n\nDespite the opposition of many prominent Qatari tribes, Jassim bin Mohammed continued to show support for the Ottomans. However, there were no signs of improvement in the partnership between the two parties, and relations further deteriorated when the Ottomans refused to aid Jassim in his expedition of Abu Dhabi-occupied Al Khor in 1882. In addition, the Ottomans supported the Ottoman subject Mohammed bin Abdul Wahab who attempted to supplant Jassim bin Mohammed in 1888.\n\nIn February 1893, Mehmed Hafiz Pasha arrived in Qatar in the interests of seeking unpaid taxes and accosting Jassim bin Mohammed's opposition to proposed Ottoman administrative reforms. Fearing that he would face death or imprisonment, Jassim bin Mohammed moved to Al Wajbah (10 miles west of Doha); he was accompanied by several tribe members. Mehmed demanded that he disband his troops and pledge his loyalty to the Ottomans. However, Jassim bin Mohammed remained adamant in his refusal to comply with Ottoman authority. In March 1893, Mehmed imprisoned his brother, Ahmed bin Mohammed Al Thani, in addition to 13 prominent Qatari tribal leaders on the Ottoman corvette 'Merrikh'. After Mehmed declined an offer to release the captives for a fee of ten thousand liras, he ordered a column of approximately 200 Ottoman troops to advance towards Jassim bin Mohammed's fortress in Al Wajbah under the command of Yusuf Effendi.\n\nShortly after arriving to Al Wajbah, Effendi's troops came under heavy gunfire by Qatari infantry and cavalry troops, which totaled 3,000 to 4,000 men. They retreated to Shebaka fortress, where they once again sustained casualties from a Qatari incursion. After they retreated to the fortress of Al Bidda, Jassim bin Mohammed's advancing column besieged the fortress and cut off the water supply of the neighborhood. The Ottomans conceded defeat and agreed to relinquish the Qatari captives in return for the safe passage of Mehmed Pasha's cavalry to Hofuf by land. Although Qatar did not gain full independence from the Ottoman Empire, the result of the battle forced a treaty that would later form the basis of Qatar emerging as an autonomous separate country within the empire.\n\nThe Ottomans officially renounced sovereignty over Qatar in 1913, and in 1916 the new ruler Abdullah bin Jassim Al Thani signed a treaty with Britain, thereby instating the area under the trucial system. This meant that Qatar relinquished its autonomy in foreign affairs, such as the power to cede territory, and other affairs, in exchange for Britain's military protection from external threats. The treaty also had provisions suppressing slavery, piracy, and gunrunning, but the British were not strict about enforcing those provisions.\nDespite Qatar coming under British protection, Abdullah bin Jassim's position was insecure. Recalcitrant tribes refused to pay tribute; disgruntled family members intrigued against him; and he felt vulnerable to the designs of Bahrain and the Wahhabi. The Al Thani were merchant princes, reliant on trade and especially the pearl trade, and dependent on other tribes to do their fighting for them, primarily the Bani Hajer who owed their allegiance to Ibn Saud, amir of the Najd and Al-Hasa. Despite numerous requests by Abdullah bin Jassim for strong military support, weapons, and a loan, the British were reluctant to become involved in inland affairs. This changed in the 1930s, when competition for oil concessions in the region intensified.\n\nThe scramble for oil raised the stakes in regional territorial disputes and signified the need to establish territorial borders. The first move came in 1922 at a boundary conference in Uqair when prospector Major Frank Holmes attempted to include Qatar in an oil concession he was discussing with Ibn Saud. Sir Percy Cox, the British representative, saw through the ploy and drew a line on the map separating the Qatar Peninsula from the mainland. The first oil survey took place in 1926 under the direction of George Martin Lees, a geologist contracted to the Anglo-Persian Oil Company, but no oil was found. The oil issue raised its head again in 1933 after an oil strike in Bahrain. Lees had already noted that, in such an eventuality, Qatar should be investigated again. After lengthy negotiations on 17 May 1935, Abdullah bin Jassim signed a concession agreement with Anglo-Persian representatives for a period of 75 years in return for 400,000 rupees on signature and 150,000 rupees per annum with royalties. As part of the agreement, Great Britain made more specific promises of assistance than they had in earlier treaties. Anglo-Persian transferred the concession to the IPC subsidiary company Petroleum Development (Qatar) Ltd. in order to meet its obligations under the Red Line Agreement.\nBahrain claimed rule over a group of islands encompassing the two countries in 1936. The largest island was Hawar Islands, situated off the west coast of Qatar, where the Bahrainis had established a small military garrison. Britain accepted the Bahraini claim over Abdullah bin Jassim's objections, in large part because the Bahraini sheikh's personal British adviser was able to phrase their case in a legal manner familiar to British officials. In 1937, the Bahrainis again laid claim to the deserted town of Zubarah after being involved in a dispute involving the Al Nuaim tribe. Abdullah bin Jassim sent a large, heavily armed force and succeeded in defeating the Al Nuaim. The British political resident in Bahrain supported Qatar's claim and warned Hamad ibn Isa Al Khalifa, the ruler of Bahrain, not to intervene militarily. Indignant over the loss of Zubarah, Hamad ibn Isa imposed a crushing embargo on trade and travel to Qatar.\n\nDrilling of the first oil well began in Dukhan in October 1938 and over a year later, the well struck oil in the Upper Jurassic limestone. Unlike the Bahraini strike, this was similar to Saudi Arabia’s Dammam field discovered three years before. Production was halted between 1942 and 1947 because of World War II and its aftermath. The disruption of food supplies caused by the war prolonged a period of economic hardship in Qatar which began in the 1920s with the collapse of the pearl trade and was exacerbated in the early 1930s with the onsets of the Great Depression and the Bahraini embargo. As was the case in previous times of privation, entire families and tribes moved to other parts of the Persian Gulf, leaving many Qatari villages deserted. Abdullah bin Jassim went into debt and groomed his favored second son, Hamad bin Abdullah Al Thani, to be his successor in preparation for his retirement. However, Hamad bin Abdullah's death in 1948 led to a succession crisis in which the main candidates were Abdullah bin Jassim's eldest son, Ali bin Abdullah Al Thani, and Hamad bin Abdullah's teenage son, Khalifa bin Hamad Al Thani.\nOil exports and payments for offshore rights began in 1949 and marked a turning point in Qatar. The oil revenues would dramatically transform the economy and society and would also provide the focus for domestic disputes and foreign relations. This became apparent to Abdullah bin Jassim when several of his relatives threatened armed opposition if they did not receive increases in their allowances. Aged and anxious, Abdullah bin Jassim turned to the British. He promised to abdicate and agreed to an official British presence in Qatar in exchange for recognition and support of Ali bin Abdullah as ruler in 1949.\n\nUnder British tutelage, the 1950s witnessed the development of government structures and public services. Ali bin Abdullah was at first reluctant to share power, which had centered in his household, with an infant bureaucracy run and staffed mainly by outsiders. Ali bin Abdullah's increasing financial difficulties and inability to control striking oil workers and obstreperous sheikhs led him to succumb to British pressure. The first official budget was drawn up by a British adviser in 1953. By 1954 there were forty-two Qatari government employees.\n\nLarge numbers of protests against the British and the ruling family occurred during the 1950s. One of the largest protests took place in 1956; it drew 2,000 participants, most of whom were high-ranking Qataris allied with Arab nationalists and dissatisfied oil workers. During another protest which took place in August 1956, the participants waved Egyptian flags and chanted anti-colonialism slogans. In October 1956, protesters tried to sabotage oil pipelines in the Persian Gulf by destroying the pipelines with a bulldozer. These were major impetuses to the development of the British-run police force which was established by the British in 1949. The demonstrations led Ali bin Abdullah to invest the police with his personal authority and support. This was a significant reversal of his previous reliance on his retainers and Bedouin fighters.\n\nPublic services developed slowly during the 1950s. The first telephone exchange opened in 1953, the first desalination plant in 1954, and the first power plant in 1957. Also built in this period were a dock, a customs warehouse, an airstrip, and a police headquarters. In the 1950s, 150 adult males of the ruling family received grants from the government. Sheikhs also received land and government positions. This mollified them as long as oil revenues increased. However, when revenues declined in the late 1950s, Ali bin Abdullah could not handle the family pressures this engendered. Discontent was fueled by his residence in Switzerland, extravagant spending, and hunting trips in Pakistan, especially among those who were excluded from the regime's largesse (non-Al Thani Qataris) and among other branches of Al Thani who desired more privileges. Seniority and proximity to the sheikh determined the size of allowances.\n\nSuccumbing to family pressures and poor health, Ali bin Abdullah abdicated in 1960. Instead of handing power over to Khalifa bin Hamad, who had been named heir apparent in 1948, he made his son, Ahmad bin Ali, ruler. Nonetheless, Khalifa bin Hamad gained considerable power as heir apparent and deputy ruler, in large part because Ahmad bin Ali spent much time outside the country. One of his first acts was to increase funding for the sheikhs at the expense of development projects and social services. In addition to allowances, adult male Al Thani were given government positions. This added to the anti-regime resentment already felt by, among others, oil workers, low-ranking Al Thani, dissident sheikhs, and some leading government officials. These individuals formed the National Unity Front in response to a fatal shooting of a protester on 19 April 1963 by one of Sheikh Ahmad bin Ali's nephews. While the Saudi monarch was at the ruler's palace on 20 April 1963, a demonstration occurred in front of the building. Police fired and killed three demonstrators, prompting the National Unity Front to organize a general strike on 21 April. The strike lasted around two weeks, and most public services were affected.\n\nThe group made a statement that week where it listed 35 of its demands to the government entailing less authority for the ruling family; protection for oil workers; recognition of trade unions; voting rights for citizens and the Arabization of the leadership. Ahmed bin Ali rejected most of these demands and moved to arrest and detain fifty of the most prominent National Unity Front members and sympathizers without trial in early May. The government also instituted some reforms in response to the movements. This included the provision of land and loans to poor farmers, instituting a policy of preferential hiring of Qatari citizens, and the election of a municipal council.\n\nThe infrastructure, foreign labor force, and bureaucracy continued to grow in the 1960s, largely under the instruction of Khalifa bin Hamad. There were also some early attempts at diversifying Qatar's economic base, most notably with the establishment of a cement factory, a national fishing company, and small-scale agriculture. An official gazette was first published in 1961, and in 1962, a nationality law was introduced. No cabinets existed during this period, however, British and Egyptian advisers helped establish a number of governmental departments, such as the Department of Agriculture and a Department of Labor and Social Affairs.\n\nIn 1968, Britain announced its plans of withdrawing its military commitments east of Suez (including those in force with Qatar) in the proceeding three years. Because of the Persian Gulf sheikhdoms' vulnerability and small size, the rulers of Bahrain, Qatar and the Trucial Coast contemplated forming a federation after the British withdrawal. The federation was first proposed in February 1968, when the rulers of Abu Dhabi and Dubai announced their intention to form a coalition, extending an invitation to other Gulf states to join. Later that month, in a summit meeting attended by the rulers of Bahrain, Qatar and the Trucial Coast, the government of Qatar proposed the formation of a federation of Arab Emirates to be governed by a higher council composed of nine rulers. This proposal was accepted and a declaration of union was approved. There were, however, several disagreements between the rulers on matters such as the location of the capital, the drafting of the constitution and the distribution of ministries.\n\nThe rulers remained divided on multiple issues despite Khalifa bin Hamad's election as chairman of the Temporary Federal Council in July 1968 and the establishment of numerous ministries. Two opposing blocs surfaced soon after the initial proposal, with Qatar and Dubai aligning together to oppose the inclinations of Bahrain and Abu Dhabi. Bahrain, being backed by Abu Dhabi, made efforts to marginalize the other rulers' roles in the union in an attempt to assume a leadership role and thus gain political leverage over their long-standing territorial disputes with Iran. The last meeting took place in October 1969 when Zayed Al Nahyan and Khalifa bin Hamad were elected the first president and prime minister of the federation, respectively. There were stalemates on numerous issues during the meeting, including the position of vice-president, the defense of the federation, and whether a constitution was required. Shortly after the meeting, the Political Agent in Abu Dhabi revealed the British government's interests in the outcome of the session, prompting Qatar and Ras al-Khaimah to withdraw from the federation over perceived foreign interference in internal affairs. The federation was consequently disbanded despite efforts by Saudi Arabia, Kuwait and Britain to reinvigorate discussions.\n\nAhmad bin Ali subsequently promulgated a provisional constitution in April 1970 which declared Qatar an independent Arab Islamic state with the Sharia as its basic law. Khalifa bin Hamad was appointed prime minister in May. The first Council of Ministers was sworn in on 1 January 1970 and seven of its ten members were Al Thani. Khalifa bin Hamad's argument prevailed with regard to the federation proposal.\n\nQatar declared its independence on 1 September 1971 and became an independent state on 3 September. When Ahmad bin Ali issued the formal announcement from his Swiss villa instead of from his palace in Doha, many Qataris were convinced that it was time for a change in leadership. On 22 February 1972, Khalifa bin Hamad deposed Ahmad bin Ali when he was on a hunting trip in Iran. Khalifa bin Hamad had the tacit support of the Al Thani and Britain and also had the political, financial and military support of Saudi Arabia.\n\nIn contrast to his predecessor's policies, Khalifa bin Hamad cut family allowances and increased spending on social programs, including housing, health, education, and pensions. In addition, he filled many top government posts with close relatives. In 1993, Khalifa bin Hamad remained the Emir, but his son, Hamad bin Khalifa, the heir apparent and minister of defense, had taken over much of the day-to-day running of the country. The two consulted with each other on all matters of importance.\n\nIn 1991, Qatar played a significant role in the Gulf War, particularly during the Battle of Khafji in which Qatari tanks rolled through the streets of the town and provided fire support for Saudi Arabian National Guard units which were engaging Iraqi Army troops. Qatar allowed coalition troops from Canada to use the country as an airbase to launch aircraft on CAP duty, and also permitted air forces from the United States and France to operate in its territories.\nOn 27 June 1995, deputy emir Sheikh Hamad bin Khalifa deposed his father Khalifa in a bloodless coup. An unsuccessful counter-coup was staged in 1996. The emir and his father are now reconciled, although some supporters of the counter-coup remain in prison. The emir announced his intention for Qatar to move toward democracy and permitted more liberal press and municipal elections as a precursor to expected parliamentary elections. A new constitution was approved via public referendum in April 2003 and came into effect in June 2005. Economic, social, and democratic reforms occurred in the proceeding years. In 2003, a woman was appointed to the cabinet as minister of education.\n\nQatar and Bahrain have had disputes over the ownership of Hawar Islands since the mid-20th century. In 2001, the International Court of Justice awarded Bahrain sovereignty over Hawar Islands while allotting Qatar sovereignty over smaller disputed islands and the Zubarah region in mainland Qatar. During the trial, Qatar provided the court with 82 forged documents to substantiate their claims of sovereignty over the territories in question. These claims were withdrawn at a later stage after Bahrain discovered the forgeries.\n\nIn 2003, Qatar served as the US Central Command headquarters and one of the main launching sites of the invasion of Iraq. In March 2005, a suicide bombing killed a British teacher at the Doha Players Theatre, shocking the country, which had not previously experienced acts of terrorism. The bombing was carried out by Omar Ahmed Abdullah Ali, an Egyptian resident in Qatar who had suspected ties to Al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula. In June 2013, Sheikh Hamad Bin Khalifa stepped down as emir and transferred leadership to his son and heir Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad Al Thani.\n\nQatar played a role in the revolutionary wave of demonstrations, protests and civil wars in the Arab world collectively known as the Arab Spring. Having shifted from its traditional diplomatic role as a mediator, Qatar moved to support several transitional states and upheavals in the Middle East and North Africa.\n\nDuring the initial months of the Arab Spring, the country's most extensive media network, Al Jazeera, helped mobilize Arab support and shaped the narratives of protests and demonstrations. Qatar sent hundreds of ground troops to support the National Transitional Council during the 2011 Libyan Civil War. The troops were primarily military advisers, and were sometimes labelled as \"mercenaries\" by the media. Qatar also participated in the aerial campaign alongside several other coalition members.\n\nQatar has taken a proactive role in the Syrian Civil War, which began in Spring of 2011. In 2012, Qatar announced they would begin arming and bankrolling the opposition. It was further reported that Qatar had funded the Syrian rebellion by \"as much as $3 billion\" over the first two years of the civil war.\n\nBeginning in 2015, Qatar has participated in the Saudi Arabian-led intervention in Yemen against the Houthis and forces loyal to former President Ali Abdullah Saleh, who was deposed in the aftermath of the Arab Spring uprisings.\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "25188", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25188", "title": "Geography of Qatar", "text": "Geography of Qatar\n\nQatar is a peninsula in the east of Arabia, bordering the Persian Gulf and Saudi Arabia, in a strategic location near major petroleum deposits. Qatar occupies on a peninsula that extends approximately to north into the Persian Gulf from the Arabian Peninsula.\n\nVarying in width between , the land is mainly flat (the highest point is ) and rocky. Notable features include coastal salt pans, elevated limestone formations (the Dukhan anticline) along the west coast under which lies the Dukhan oil field, and massive sand dunes surrounding Khawr al Udayd, an inlet of the Persian Gulf in the southeast known to local English speakers as the Inland Sea.\n\nThe peninsula of Qatar is low-lying. Its shape the surface expression of the Qatar Arch, one of the largest structural characteristics of the Arabian Plate. It is enveloped by loose sand and pebbles broken off the outcropping limestone. Smooth plains are found in the east, where the surface is covered by fine-grained dust. The south and south-west portion of the peninsula mainly comprises sand dunes and salt flats.\n\nThe coastline is emergent and gently slopes toward the sea. Many flat, low-lying offshore islands are located near the coast and are accompanied by coral reefs. As a result of salt water coming into contact with the low-lying land, many salt pans have formed near the coast.\n\nThe long summer (May through September) is characterized by intense heat and alternating dryness and humidity, with temperatures reaching . Temperatures are moderate from November to April, ranging from as high as in April to as low as in January. Rainfall is negligible, averaging per year, confined to the winter months, and falling in brief, sometimes heavy storms that often flood the small ravines and the usually dry wadis.\n\nSudden, violent dust storms occasionally descend on the peninsula, blotting out the sun, causing wind damage, and temporarily disrupting transport and other services.\n\nThe scarcity of rainfall and the limited underground water, most of which has such a high mineral content that it is unsuitable for drinking or irrigation, restricted the population and the extent of agricultural and industrial development the country could support until desalination projects began. Although water continues to be provided from underground sources, most is obtained by desalination of seawater.\n\nAlthough most of the country consists of sand deserts, a small part of the country houses different vegetation zones, where trees, reeds and shrubs like tamarind, phragmites, and mace can grow. These regions are mostly to the east, near the coast.\n\nQatar has one land border. The country borders Saudi Arabia to the south. The boundary with Saudi Arabia was settled in 1965 but never demarcated. Qatar's northwest coast is fewer than from the main islands of Bahrain, while the small Hawar Islands of Bahrain are only 1.4 km (0.8 mi) off that coast. The peninsula's northernmost point is Ras Rakan.\n\n\"contiguous zone:\"\n\n<br>\"exclusive economic zone:\"\nas determined by bilateral agreements, or the median line\n<br>\"territorial sea:\"\nOf the islands belonging to Qatar, Halul is the most important. Lying about east of Doha, it serves as a storage area and loading terminal for oil from the surrounding offshore fields. Hawar and the adjacent islands immediately off the west coast are the subject of a territorial dispute between Qatar and Bahrain.\n\nBased on estimates in 2011 estimates, 5.6% of the land is agricultural. Arable land comprises 1.1%, permanent crops 0.2% and permanent pasture 4.6%. 94.4% of the land was used for other uses. In 2003, of land was irrigated.\n\nMost of Qatar's surface lies on Cenozoic strata. These strata have an abundance of mineral resources, most of which have not yet been exploited, such as limestone and clay. The Upper Dammam Formation in the Middle Eocene period is the most predominant surface layer. It is constituted by limestone and dolomite. The northern zone of Qatar, which comprises the most significant source of fresh groundwater in the peninsula, primarily draws its water from the Umm Err Radhuma Formation and Rus Formation dating to the Paleocene and Lower Eocene periods, respectively. The Mesozoic strata are the most important layers as they contain petroleum. The first substantial deposit of crude oil was discovered in 1940 in the Jurassic period Arab Formation.\n\nThe capital, Doha, is located on the central east coast on a sweeping (if shallow) harbor. Other ports include Umm Said, Al Khawr, and Al Wakrah. Only Doha and Umm Said are capable of handling commercial shipping, although a large port and a terminal for loading natural gas are planned at Ras Laffan Industrial City, north of Al Khawr. Coral reefs and shallow coastal waters make navigation difficult in areas where channels have not been dredged.\n\nDoha is the capital of the country and the major administrative, commercial, and population center. In 1993 it was linked to other towns and development sites by a system of about of paved roads. Doha's international airport has an approximately main runway, capable of receiving all kinds of aircraft.\n\nQatar is currently party to the following international environmental agreements:\n"}
{"id": "25189", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25189", "title": "Demographics of Qatar", "text": "Demographics of Qatar\n\nNatives of the Arabian Peninsula, many Qataris are descended from a number of migratory tribes that came to Qatar in the 18th century to escape the harsh conditions of the neighboring areas of Nejd and Al-Hasa. Some are descended from Omani tribes. Qatar has about 2.6 million inhabitants as of early 2017, the majority of whom (about 92%) live in Doha, the capital. Foreign workers amount to around 88% of the population, with Indians being the largest community numbering around 650,000. As of an unofficial 2017 report, there were a further 350,000 Nepalis, 280,000 Bangladeshis, 260,000 Filipinos, 200,000 Egyptians, 145,000 Sri Lankans and 125,000 Pakistanis among many other nationalities. The treatment of these foreign workers has been heavily criticized in recent years, with living conditions suggested to be exploitative and abusive.\n\nThe Qataris are mainly Sunni Muslims. Islam is the official religion, and Islamic jurisprudence is the basis of Qatar's legal system. Arabic is the official language and English is the lingua franca of business. Hindi and Urdu are also widely spoken, especially by the South Asian foreign workers. Education is compulsory and free for all residents 6–16 years old. Qatar has an increasingly high literacy rate.\n\nQataris can be divided into three ethnic groups: Bedouins, Hadar, and Africans-origin. Bedouins are descended from the nomads of the Arabian Peninsula. The Hadar are mostly descended from Iran, Pakistan, and Afghanistan and are occasionally referred to as \"Irani-Qataris\".\n\nAs of 2011-2014 report by International Organization for Migration, 176,748 Nepali Citizens of Madhesi ethnicity lived in Qatar as migrant workers.\nAs of 2012, about 7,000 Turkish nationals live in Qatar.\n\nAs of 2016, about 1,000 Colombian nationals and descendants live in Qatar.\n\nThe following demographic statistics are from the CIA World Factbook unless otherwise indicated.\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\nOther sources\n\n\n\nY-Chromosome DNA Y-DNA represents the male lineage, The Qatari Y-chromosome in large belongs to haplogroup J which comprises two thirds of the total chromosomes\n\nMitochondrial DNA mtDNA represents the female lineage The Qatari mitochondrial DNA shows much more diversity than the Y-DNA lineages, with more than 35% of the lineages showing African ancestry (East African & Subsaharan) & the rest of the lineages being Eurasian.\n"}
{"id": "25190", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25190", "title": "Politics of Qatar", "text": "Politics of Qatar\n\nThe political system of Qatar is either an absolute monarchy or a constitutional monarchy, with the Emir of Qatar as head of state and head of government. Under the 2003 constitutional referendum it should be a constitutional monarchy. Sharia Law is the main source of Qatari legislation according to Qatar's Constitution.\n\nSharia law is the main source of Qatari legislation according to Qatar's Constitution. Sharia law is applied to laws pertaining to family law, inheritance, and several criminal acts (including adultery, robbery and murder). In some cases in Sharia-based family courts, a female's testimony is worth half a man's and in some cases a female witness is not accepted at all. Codified family law was introduced in 2006. In practice, Qatar's legal system is a mixture of civil law and Islamic law.\n\nFlogging is used in Qatar as a punishment for alcohol consumption or illicit sexual relations. Article 88 of Qatar's criminal code declares the punishment for adultery is 100 lashes. Adultery is punishable by death when a Muslim woman and a non-Muslim man are involved. In 2006, a Filipino woman was sentenced to 100 lashes for adultery. In 2010, at least 18 people (mostly foreign nationals) were sentenced to flogging of between 40 and 100 lashes for offences related to “illicit sexual relations” or alcohol consumption. In 2011, at least 21 people (mostly foreign nationals) were sentenced to floggings of between 30 and 100 lashes for offences related to “illicit sexual relations” or alcohol consumption. In 2012, six expatriates were sentenced to floggings of either 40 or 100 lashes. Only Muslims considered medically fit were liable to have such sentences carried out. It is unknown if the sentences were implemented. More recently in April 2013, a Muslim expatriate was sentenced to 40 lashes for alcohol consumption. In June 2014, a Muslim expatriate was sentenced to 40 lashes for consuming alcohol and driving under the influence. Judicial corporal punishment is common in Qatar due to the Hanbali interpretation of Sharia Law.\n\nStoning is a legal punishment in Qatar. Apostasy is a crime punishable by the death penalty in Qatar. Blasphemy is punishable by up to seven years in prison and proselytizing can be punished by up to 10 years in prison. Homosexuality is a crime punishable by the death penalty for Muslims.\n\nAlcohol consumption is partially legal in Qatar, some five-star luxury hotels are allowed to sell alcohol to their non-Muslim customers. Muslims are not allowed to consume alcohol in Qatar and Muslims caught consuming alcohol are liable to flogging or deportation. Non-Muslim expatriates can obtain a permit to purchase alcohol for personal consumption. The Qatar Distribution Company (a subsidiary of Qatar Airways) is permitted to import alcohol and pork; it operates the one and only liquor store in the country, which also sells pork to holders of liquor licences. Qatari officials have also indicated a willingness to allow alcohol in \"fan zones\" at the 2022 FIFA World Cup.\n\nUntil recently, restaurants on the Pearl-Qatar (a man-made island near Doha) were allowed to serve alcoholic drinks. In December 2011, however, restaurants on the Pearl were told to stop selling alcohol. No explanation was given for the ban. Speculation about the reason includes the government's desire to project a more pious image in advance of the country's first election of a royal advisory body and rumours of a financial dispute between the government and the resort's developers.\n\nIn 2014, Qatar launched a modesty campaign to remind tourists of the modest dress code. Female tourists are advised not to wear leggings, miniskirts, sleeveless dresses and short or tight clothing in public. Men are advised against wearing only shorts and singlets.\n\nAs of 2014, certain provisions of the Qatari Criminal Code allows punishments such as flogging and stoning to be imposed as criminal sanctions. The UN Committee Against Torture found that these practices constituted a breach of the obligations imposed by the UN Convention Against Torture. Qatar retains the death penalty, mainly for threats against national security.\n\nUnder the provisions of Qatar's sponsorship law, sponsors have the unilateral power to cancel workers' residency permits, deny workers' ability to change employers, report a worker as \"absconded\" to police authorities, and deny permission to leave the country. As a result, sponsors may restrict workers’ movements and workers may be afraid to report abuses or claim their rights. According to the ITUC, the visa sponsorship system allows the exaction of forced labour by making it difficult for a migrant worker to leave an abusive employer or travel overseas without permission. Qatar also does not maintain wage standards for its immigrant labour. Qatar commissioned international law firm DLA Piper to produce a report investigating the immigrant labour system. In May 2014 DLA Piper released over 60 recommendations for reforming the kafala system including the abolition of exit visas and the introduction of a minimum wage which Qatar has pledged to implement.\n\nCases of ill-treatment of immigrant labour have been observed. The Nepalese ambassador to Qatar, Maya Kumari Sharma, described the emirate as an \"open jail\".\nQatar does not have national occupational health standards or guidelines, and workplace injuries are the third highest cause of accidental deaths. In May 2012, Qatari officials declared their intention to allow the establishment of an independent trade union. Qatar also announced it will scrap its sponsor system for foreign labour, which requires that all foreign workers be sponsored by local employers, who in some cases hold workers' passports and can deny them permission to change jobs.\n\nIn Qatar, the ruling Al Thani (ال ثاني) family continued to hold power following the declaration of independence in 1971. The head of state is the Emir, and the right to rule Qatar is passed on within the Al Thani family. Politically, Qatar is evolving from a traditional society into a modern welfare state. Government departments have been established to meet the requirements of social and economic progress. The Basic Law of Qatar 1970 institutionalized local customs rooted in Qatar's conservative Islamic heritage, granting the Emir preeminent power. The Emir's role is influenced by continuing traditions of consultation, rule by consensus, and the citizen's right to appeal personally to the Emir. The Emir, while directly accountable to no one, cannot violate the Sharia (Islamic law) and, in practice, must consider the opinions of leading notables and the religious establishment. Their position was institutionalized in the Advisory Council, an appointed body that assists the Emir in formulating policy. There is no electoral system. Political parties are banned.\n\nThe influx of expatriate Arabs has introduced ideas that call into question the tenets of Qatar's traditional society, but there has been no serious challenge to Al Thani rule.\n\nIn February 1972, the heir apparent and Prime Minister, Sheikh Khalifa bin Hamad Al Thani, deposed his cousin, Emir Ahmad, and assumed power. This move was supported by the key members of Al Thani and took place without violence or signs of political unrest.\n\nOn 27 June 1995, the heir apparent, Sheikh Hamad bin Khalifa Al Thani, deposed his father, Emir Khalifa, in a bloodless coup. Emir Hamad and his father reconciled in 1996. Increased freedom of the press followed, and the Qatar-based Al Jazeera television channel (founded late 1996) is widely regarded as an example of an uncensored source of news in Arab countries. However, the network has been met with negative responses by the governments of many Arab states.\n\nOn 25 June 2013 Tamim bin Hamad Al Thani became the Emir of Qatar after his father Hamad bin Khalifa Al Thani handed over power in a televised speech.\n\n\nSource: Ministry of Interior\n\nThe Consultative Assembly (\"Majlis as-Shura\") has 35 appointed members with only consultative tasks. However, the 2003 Constitution of Qatar calls for a 45-member elected Legislature, which is to be made up of 30 elected representatives and 15 appointed by the Emir. In 2006, Prime Minister Al Thani – then the Deputy PM – announced that elections would be held in 2007. However, only a legislative council to review the subject was created that year. The actual elections have been postponed three times; most recently in June 2010, when the Emir extended the Consultative Assembly's tenure until 2013.\n\nQatar held a constitutional referendum in 2003, which was overwhelmingly supported. The first municipal elections with men and women voters and candidates were held in 2007 and 2011. The first legislative election, for two thirds of the legislative council's 45 seats, were planned for 2016. In June 2016 they were effectively postponed to at least 2019.\nSuffrage is currently limited to municipal elections and two thirds of the seats in the legislative council, with the voting age set at 18. Expatriate residents are excluded, as are the vast number of residents who are prevented from applying for citizenship. The elected Municipal Council has no executive powers but may offer advice to the Minister.\n\nThe Qatari authorities keep a relatively tight rein on freedom of expression. The Freedom in the World 2015 report by Freedom House lists Qatar as \"Not Free\", and on a 1–7 scale (1 being the most \"free\") rates the country a 6 for political rights and 5 for civil liberties. , the Democracy Index describes Qatar as an \"authoritarian regime\" with a score of 3.18 out of ten, and it ranks 136th out of the 167 countries covered.\n\nThere are 7 municipalities (baladiyat, singular - baladiyah) of Qatar; Ad Dawhah, Al Daayen, Al Rayyan, Al Khor, Al Wakrah, Al Rayyan, Al Shamal, and Umm Salal. Each municipality assumes administrative responsibilities over zones (cities and districts) within their boundaries.\n\nOn October 10, 2005, for the first time, Qatar was elected to a two-year term on the UN Security Council for 2006–2007.\n\nAccording to BBC, in April 2006 Qatar announced that it will give US$50 million (£28 million) to the new Hamas-led Palestinian government. Hamas, an ally of Iran and Hezbollah, is considered by the US and the EU to be a terrorist organization.\n\nIn May 2006, Qatar pledged more than $100 million to Hurricane Katrina relief to colleges and universities in Louisiana affected by the hurricane. Some of this money was also distributed to families looking to repair damaged homes by Neighborhood Housing Services of New Orleans, Inc.\n\nWith the advent of the Arab Spring in 2011, Qatar has been seen as meddling in the affairs of other Arab countries, supporting insurgents, generally and increasingly radical Islamists and Salafists. This policy has led to rebukes by neighboring Gulf states such as Saudi Arabia, Bahrain, and the United Arab Emirates. Qatar joined NATO operations in Libya and reportedly armed Libyan opposition groups. It is also became a major provider of money and support for rebel groups in the Syrian civil war. With close ties to the Muslim Brotherhood the emirate's funding for rebels strongly favored Islamic and Salafist forces in both Libya and Syria.\n\nThe government of Qatar owns the Al Jazeera television network. The network has been accused of being biased and taking an active role in the affairs of other countries specifically during the Arab Spring in 2011. Numerous countries have complained about biased reporting in support of Qatar policy.\n\nMost of the developed countries (plus Brunei and Indonesia) are exempt from visa requirements. Citizens of exempted countries can also request a joint visa that allows them to travel to Oman as well.\n\nQatar is member of ABEDA, AFESD, AL, AMF, ESCWA, FAO, G-77, GCC, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICRM, IDB, IFAD, IFRCS, IHO (pending member), ILO, IMF, International Maritime Organization, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ISO (correspondent), ITU, NAM, OAPEC, OIC, OPCW, OPEC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCO, WHO, WIPO, WMO, and WTO.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "25191", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25191", "title": "Economy of Qatar", "text": "Economy of Qatar\n\nPetroleum and liquefied natural gas are the cornerstones of Qatar's economy and account for more than 70% of total government revenue, more than 60% of gross domestic product, and roughly 85% of export earnings. Proved oil reserves of 15 billion barrels (588,000,000 m) should ensure continued output at current levels for 23 years. Gas has given Qatar a per capita GDP that ranks among the highest in the world. Qatar's proved reserves of natural gas exceed 7000 km, more than 5% of the world total and the third-largest reserves of any country in the world. Production and export of natural gas are becoming increasingly important. Long-term goals include the development of off-shore petroleum and the diversification of the economy.\n\nQatar is now the richest country in the world. Current GDP per capita registered a world record-breaking peak growth of 1,156% in the 70s. This became quickly unsustainable and Qatar's current GDP per capita contracted 53% in the 80s. But rising global oil demand helped current GDP per capita to expand 94% in the 90s. Diversification is still a long-term issue for this over-exposed economy.\n\nThis table is of Qatar's gross domestic product at market prices as estimated by the International Monetary Fund with figures in millions of Qatari Rials.\n\nFor purchasing power parity comparisons only, the US Dollar is exchanged at 3.67 Qatari Riyals. Mean wages were $59.99 per man-hour in 2009.\n\nIn February 2012, the International Bank of Qatar reported that GDP grew by 19.9% in 2011, but estimated that 2012 growth would slow to 9.8%\n\nBefore the emergence of petrol-based industry, Qatar was a poor pearl diving country. The exploration of oil and gas fields began in 1939. In 1973, oil production and revenues increased dramatically, moving Qatar out of the ranks of the world's poorest countries and providing it with one of the highest per capita incomes in the world.\n\nQatar's economy was in a downturn from 1982 to 1989. OPEC (Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries) quotas on crude oil production, the lower price for oil, and the generally unpromising outlook on international markets reduced oil earnings. In turn, the Qatari government's spending plans had to be cut to match lower income. The resulting recessionary local business climate caused many firms to lay off expatriate staff. With the economy recovering in the 1990s, expatriate populations, particularly from Egypt and South Asia, have grown again.\n\nOil production will not long remain at peak levels of 500,000 barrels (80,000 m³) per day, as oil fields are projected to be mostly depleted by 2023. However, large natural gas reserves have been located off Qatar's northeast coast. There have been found also some oil fields or some large gas fields containing larger amounts of oil. For example, the state owned Qatar Petroleum found 2 offshore oil fields in the 1960s. Back then production was too expensive. However, technological development led to production over 30 years later. Oil and gas condensate will also be produced in the gas fields.\n\nThe gas condensate can be refined to usual oil products in specialised refineries. The costs are a bit higher but it is normal today for companies to use the gas condensate too. Oil offshore production in 2008 for PS-2 and PS-3 blocks was about 31.1 million barrels (84,995 b/d). Joint Ventures facilities (PS-1, ALK, K & A): Combined oil production from these three joint venture production facilities in 2008 was 57.4 million barrels (156,873 b/d). Like with gas fields there are more offshore blocks which need to be explored and could increase the oil output. So the 500,000 bpd peak and a depletion in 2023 is delayed. With higher oil prices it is expected that the offshore exploration of oil and/or natural gas fields will go on. Oil production in June 2016 seemed to be around 670,000 barrels per day, a bit down from February 2016 production of 692,000 barrels per day. Taking all liquids together Qatar is already far beyond a million barrels per day.\n\nQatar's proved reserves of gas are the third-largest in the world, exceeding 7000 km³ (250 trillion cubic feet). The economy was boosted in 1991 by completion of the $1.5-billion Phase I of North Field gas development. In 1996, the Qatargas project began exporting liquefied natural gas (LNG) to Japan. Further phases of North Field gas development costing billions of dollars are in various stages of planning and development.\n\nQatar's heavy industrial projects, all based in Umm Said, include a refinery with a 50,000 barrels (8,000 m³) per day capacity, a fertilizer plant for urea and ammonia, a steel plant, and a petrochemical plant. All these industries use gas for fuel. Most are joint ventures between European and Japanese firms and the state-owned Qatar General Petroleum Corporation (QGPC). The U.S. is the major equipment supplier for Qatar's oil and gas industry, and U.S. companies are playing a major role in North Field gas development.\n890-\nQatar pursues a vigorous program of \"Qatarization\", under which all joint venture industries and government departments strive to move Qatari nationals into positions of greater authority. Growing numbers of foreign-educated Qataris, including many educated in the U.S., are returning home to assume key positions formerly occupied by expatriates. In order to control the influx of expatriate workers, Qatar has tightened the administration of its foreign manpower programs over the past several years. Security is the principal basis for Qatar's strict entry and immigration rules and regulations.\n\nThe government considers industry to be an integral part of its plan to diversify the economy and maximize its huge natural gas reserves, which serve as the primary feedstock for the sector. Accordingly, careful planning has gone into industrial development. With an eye towards exports, development has been clustered around the ports of Ras Laffan Industrial City and Mesaieed Industrial Area, which are key centers of energy. The result has seen considerable growth over the years. Industries Qatar (IQ), a producer of petrochemicals, fertilizers and steel, is a regional powerhouse, surpassed only in size by Saudi Basic Industries Corporation (SABIC), the Middle East’s largest chemical producer. In 2007 the manufacturing sector made the third-largest contribution to GDP among non-oil and gas sectors, equivalent to about 7.5% of GDP. \n\nPetrochemicals and fertilizers supply make up a large portion of the industrial base, along with steel and other construction materials, through Qatar Steel and Qatar Primary Material Company (QPMC). Indeed, over the past few years, demand for construction materials experienced a major surge as the development boom swept the Persian Gulf region. But the global financial crisis has put a significant dent in demand in the region, as project credit lines dry up and investor sentiment remains cautious. The crisis has in fact impacted the whole of the industrial sector – IQ saw its net profit drop in the fourth quarter of 2008 more than 90% over the same period the previous year. But in relative terms, the sector has fared better than most and IQ still managed to post an annual profit of $2bn. Large profit chunks from years past have been channeled into capital investments, which should help the sector ride out the storm. IQ, for example, is pushing several major expansion projects, worth almost $6bn, ahead. Qatar is expected to be one of the fastest growing economies in 2009 – the hope is it will be enough to keep the industrial sector on an upward trajectory.\n\nThe Qatari banking sector managed to escape the direct impact of the global subprime fallout, but was not altogether unscathed by its aftershocks. Overall, it was the best performing of the Gulf Cooperation Council markets in the last quarter of 2008 and most banks posted substantial profits for 2008. But the sector is also facing issues of liquidity, declining customer confidence and a forced reluctance to lend. In a bid to strengthen the banks’ positions, the Qatar Investment Authority (QIA) announced in early 2009 that it was willing to take a 10-20% stake in any interested local listed banks by way of a capital injection, although this was later reduced to 5% stakes and an additional 5% at the end of 2009. \n\nThe Qatari government also announced in March 2009 that it was planning to buy the investment portfolio of the banks in the hope this would encourage them to continue lending. Cautious sector sentiment has also been compounded by the Qatar Central Bank’s (QCB’s) lending restrictions, which demand a loan-to-deposit ratio of 90%. Given the high level of integration between Qatar’s economy and the Persian Gulf region, as well as the wider world, a slowdown in business and banking activity seemed inevitable. Nevertheless, Qatar’s banking sector has been faring relatively well, considering the strife experienced in other countries, and insiders are confident that activity will return to its previous brisk pace in the second half of 2009 as confidence slowly rebuilds around the globe.\n\nThe Islamic finance sector enjoyed increased activity in 2008 and is expected to continue to grow into 2009 as more sophisticated financial instruments spark the interest of investors. In addition to Islamic banks, such as Qatar Islamic Bank (QIB), Qatar International Islamic Bank (QIIB) and newcomer Masraf Al Rayyan, conventional banks have also been entering the sharia-compliant sector and are coming to view an Islamic subsidiary as a virtual necessity in order to maintain market standing. Islamic banks currently take the lion’s share of sharia-compliant business, though the conventional banks are working hard to take a greater share of market activity. Both Islamic banks and Islamic subsidiaries did remarkably well in the first three quarters of 2008, during which overall financing activity increased by 70.6% compared to the same period in the previous year. The global financial crisis slowed this growth though. Poor market conditions have contributed to a marked slowdown of Islamic bond, or sukuk, activity in 2008 throughout the Persian Gulf. But other segments, such as Islamic insurance, or takaful, have not seen a similar downturn. Overall, challenges to further growth remain, including a lack of qualified staff to meet the growing demand for sharia-compliant banking services.\n\nThe stock market capitalisation of listed companies in Qatar was valued at $95,487 million in 2007 by the World Bank. As 2008 drew to a close, no capital markets around the globe, including Qatar's, were immune to the effects of the sub-prime fallout. That said, there is considerable optimism that Qatar's bourse, the Doha Securities Market (DSM), will remain relatively resilient to the ongoing international turbulence. It has followed the same peak-trough trajectory as many others around the globe, hitting record highs in mid-2008, before diving in late 2008 and early 2009. Between December 2006 and July 2008 the DSM Index rose about 117% before the global financial crisis wiped out most of these gains. In the first few months of 2009, the DSM lost about 40% of its value. In an effort to stave off further losses, the government announced in February 2009 that it would step in to buy up shares of troubled banks amounting to about 10% of the market's capitalisation. The move improved investor optimism and is hoped to prevent the market from falling further. The proposal to create a single unified regulator as early as 2010 to oversee all banking and financial services is viewed as another promising development that will transform the financial sector for the better.\n\nUnder the ambitious five-year development plan of the Qatar Tourism and Exhibitions Authority (QTEA), the government aimed to boost the number of visitors from 964,000 as of 2007 to 1.5m by 2010. The funding required to meet this goal was present in sufficient amounts; in 2008 the state allocated some $17bn for tourism development through 2014, most of which was allocated towards hotels, exhibition space and infrastructure. In order to keep up with a rising number of visitors, the government set a goal of increasing hotel capacity 400% by 2012. In addition to financial support, the government has also worked to ease business regulations in a bid to increase private sector activity. A major aspect of expansion plans is the Hamad International Airport, which will have the capacity to handle up to 24m passengers upon the completion of the first phase in 2012.\n\nOther niche tourism segments receiving special focus include cultural tourism on the back of the high publicity opening of Doha’s Museum of Islamic Art, and sports tourism, initially spurred by the Asian Games, to which Qatar played host in 2006. The government appears to be committed to long-term expansion plans, but challenges nevertheless remain, including effective marketing to the international community as well as the effect of the financial crisis on global tourism appetite.\n\nWith a fast-expanding population and substantial economic growth over the past decade, a reliable and extensive transportation network is becoming increasingly necessary within Qatar. So far the government, the primary transport developer, has done well in terms of keeping up with demand for new transportation options. In 2008 the Public Works Authority (Ashghal), one of the bodies that oversees infrastructure development, underwent a major reorganisation in order to streamline and modernise the authority in preparation for major project expansions across all segments in the near future. Ashghal works in tandem with the Urban Planning and Development Authority (UPDA), the body that designed the transportation master plan, instituted in March 2006 and running to 2025.\n\nAs driving is the primary mode of transport in Qatar, the road network is a major focus of the plan. Project highlights in this segment include the multibillion-dollar Doha Expressway and the Qatar Bahrain Causeway, which will connect Qatar to Bahrain and Saudi Arabia and is considered a milestone in regional interconnectivity. Mass-transit options, such as a Doha metro, light-rail system and more extensive bus networks, are also under development to ease road congestion. In addition, the railway system is being significantly expanded and could eventually form an integral part of a GCC-wide network linking all the Arab states of the Persian Gulf. The airport, too, is expanding capacity to keep up with rising visitor numbers. The New Doha International Airport is one of the largest projects in Qatar today and will boast a capacity of 50m passengers upon completion in 2015. Finally, port infrastructure is seen as an integral part of Qatar's economic development as it focuses on LNG and industrial exports. The port at Mesaieed is undergoing expansion. While the financial crisis may present challenges to infrastructure development, once all projects are completed Qatar will have one of the most advanced and modern transport infrastructures in the region.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "25192", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25192", "title": "Telecommunications in Qatar", "text": "Telecommunications in Qatar\n\nTelephones - main lines in use:\n327,000 (2012)\n\nTelephones - mobile cellular:\n2,600,000 (2012)\n\nTelephone system:\nmodern system centered in Doha\n<br>\"domestic:\"\nNA\n<br>\"international:\"\ntropospheric scatter to Bahrain; microwave radio relay to Saudi Arabia and UAE; submarine cable to Bahrain and UAE; satellite earth stations - 2 Intelsat (1 Atlantic Ocean and 1 Indian Ocean) and 1 Arabsat\n\nRadio broadcast stations:\nAM 6, FM 5, shortwave 1 (1998)\n\nRadios:\n256,000 (1997)\n\nTelevision broadcast stations:\n1 (plus three repeaters) (1997)\n\nTelevisions:\n230,000 (1997)\n\nAs of 2015, there are two ISPs in Qatar: Ooredoo (formerly Q-Tel) and Vodafone Qatar. There were 563,800 internet users in 2009. The country code (top level domain) is QA. ADSL was launched in 2002 in Qatar by Ooredoo. There were 25,000 ADSL users in 2005.\n\nA 2015 report by the UN Broadband Commission for Digital Development ranked Qatar in first place among the developing countries by their respective percentage population using internet. The country also ranked second globally for percentage of households with internet.\n\n"}
{"id": "25193", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25193", "title": "Transport in Qatar", "text": "Transport in Qatar\n\nThis article is about transport in Qatar.\n\nIn 2002, the Qatari government launched Mowasalat, a company 100% owned by the government, managed and operated by the state authorities to ensure the smooth provision of \"integrated ground transport services\" for the entire country with a growing population of more than 1,400,000 people. Previously, 3,000 privately owned orange taxis used to rule the streets of Qatar but the government took them off the roads as they saw them as a threat to the new Mowasalat taxis. There has been much controversy over this move, as it is now very hard to find a taxi in Doha.\n\nPublic buses now service over 35 routes covering most locations of Doha with minimal fares making public transport in Qatar a thrifty solution to the problems of rush hours and parking difficulties.\n\nPresently, Mowasalat, under the brand-name 'Karwa', now operates more than 3,000 new and well-maintained taxi sedans including the recently acquired airport taxis with spacious cabins using the 2007 Ford Freestars, and more than 120 public buses, school buses and private-hire coaches. In 2009, the Mowasalat created a world record for the largest parade of buses numbering 300 in all. In addition, its Doha Limousine Service has 100 standard (unbranded, no Karwa logo) limousines and 200 (Jaguar XJ) VIP units that are mostly placed at the Doha International Airport and at major hotels.\n\nHowever, those who are with no own transportation still face difficulties to move around since the number of taxis are much less compared to the actual need of the increased population. All the line buses operate only through the assigned specific lines based to the Central Bus Stations at Al-Ghanem area of the old city.\n\nThere are currently no major railways in Qatar. \n\nIn August 2008 Qatari Diar Real Estate Investment created a Joint-Venture with Deutsche Bahn International of Germany, Qatar Railway Development Company to plan a railway network in Qatar.\nOn 22 November 2009 Deutsche Bahn and Qatari signed a memorandum of Agreement to build high-speed railway lines and underground transport networks in Qatar and Bahrain. This agreement has never been executed.\nThe Qatar Railways Development Company (QRDC) was created in 2011, and, soon after this, it has been decided that Qatar Rail will be the sole owner and manager of Qatar’s rail network and will be responsible for the design, construction, commissioning, operation and maintenance of the entire rail network and systems. However,\n\nQatar Rail will consist of:\n\n\nThe total length of the Qatar Rail network will consist of approximately: \n\nIn June 2013, Qatar Rail awarded four design and build contracts worth approximately $8.2 billion for phase one of the Doha metro. The project will include four rail lines and an underground section in the center of the capital Doha and will link stadiums for the 2022 World Cup soccer tournament. The contracts were for the Red Line North project, the Red Line South project, the Green Line project and another one to design and build the metro’s major stations. The projects are expected to employ more than 20,000 workers at its peak, construction is scheduled to begin later this year for completion by 2019. Construction of the metro was originally planned to start in the first quarter of 2010.\n\n\n\nMost of the main roads in this tiny country have been updated to multilane, double carriageway motorways, including the following:\n\n\nCrude Oil 235 km; Natural Gas 400 km\n\n\n\nHamad International Airport is the only international passenger airport in Qatar. There are five other airfields in the country, three paved, two unpaved.\n\n"}
{"id": "25194", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25194", "title": "Qatar Armed Forces", "text": "Qatar Armed Forces\n\nThe Qatar Armed Forces are the military forces of Qatar. The country maintains a modest military force of approximately 42,800 men, including an army (25,500), navy (2,800), Emiri Guard (5,000), ISF (7,000) and air force (2,500). Furthermore, since 2015 Qatar implemented mandatory military conscription with an average of 2000 graduates per year. Qatar's defence expenditures were a total of $1.913 billion, about 1.5% of the national GDP, as of 2010 according to the SIPRI. Qatar has recently signed defence pacts with the United States in 2002 and 2013 and with the United Kingdom, as well as with France earlier, in 1994. Qatar plays an active role in the collective defence efforts of the Gulf Cooperation Council; the other five members are Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Bahrain, the UAE, and Oman. The presence of a large American military base in the country provides the country with a guaranteed source of defence and national security. SIPRI states that Qatar's plans to transform and significantly enlarge its armed forces have accelerated in 2014, and in 2010-14 Qatar was the 46th largest arms importer in the world. Orders in 2013 for 62 tanks and 24 self-propelled guns from Germany were followed in 2014 by a number of other contracts, including 24 combat helicopters and 3 AEW aircraft from the USA, and 2 tanker aircraft from Spain. As of 2016, Qatar maintains advanced anti air and anti ship capabilities with deliveries of Patriot PAC-3 MSE Batteries, Exocet MM40 Block 3 and Marte ER anti-ship missiles.\n\nThe armed forces were founded in 1971 after the country gained independence from the United Kingdom.\n\nQatar took part in the Gulf War of 1991, with a battalion at the Battle of Khafji. It also hosted the 614th Tactical Fighter Squadron at Doha.\n\nIn July 2008, the US Defence Security Cooperation Agency announced Qatar’s official request for logistics support, training, and associated equipment and services. The total value of the support arrangements could be as high as $400 million.\n\nIn March 2011, Qatar announced the participation of its Air Force in the enforcement of the Libyan no-fly zone.\n\nAccording to Aljazeera news, in December 2016 Qatar deployed 1,000 ground troops in Yemen to fight in behalf of the ousted president Abdrabbuh Mansur Hadi, Qatar Armed Forces soldiers, backed by 200 armoured vehicles and 30 Apache helicopters, head to Yemen's Marib province.\n\nThe Armed Forces of Qatar have suffered 4 killed and 2 wounded during the deployment in Yemen.\n\nThe Qatar Emiri Land Force is the largest branch of the Qatar Armed Forces. Qatar maintains a modest military force of approximately 11,800 men; the army is made of 8,500 men. The lack of sufficient indigenous manpower to staff the army is a continuing problem; Qatari citizens constitute only 30 percent of the army, in which more than twenty nationalities are represented.\n\nInitially outfitted with British weaponry, Qatar shifted much of its procurement to France during the 1980s in response to French efforts to develop closer relations. The tank battalion was equipped with French-built AMX-30 main battle tanks, before later being replaced by German Leopard 2A7's. Other armored vehicles include French AMX-10P APCs and the French VAB, adopted as the standard wheeled combat vehicle. The artillery unit has a few French 155mm self-propelled howitzers. The principal antitank weapons are French Milan and HOT wire-guided missiles.\n\nQatar had also illicitly acquired a few Stinger shoulder-fired SAMs, possibly from Afghan rebel groups, at a time when the United States was trying to maintain tight controls on Stingers in the Middle East. When Qatar refused to turn over the missiles, the United States Senate in 1988 imposed a ban on the sale of all weapons to Qatar. The ban was repealed in late 1990 when Qatar satisfactorily accounted for its disposition of the Stingers.\n\nQatari tank battalion fought in the Gulf war in 1991, their AMX-30's took part in the battle of Khafji. Qatari contingent, composed mostly of Pakistani recruits, acquitted itself well during the war.\n\nQatar signed a contract with the German defence company Krauss-Maffei Wegmann (KMW) for the delivery of 24 artillery systems PzH 2000 and 62 LEOPARD 2 main battle tanks.\n\nThe US DSCA announces that Qatar wants to join its neighbor the UAE, and field 2 medium-range THAAD batteries of its own.\n\nTheir request is worth up to $6.5 billion, and includes up to 12 THAAD Launchers, 150 THAAD missiles, 2 THAAD Fire Control and Communications units, 2 AN/TPY-2 THAAD Radars, and 1 Early Warning Radar (EWR). The USA would also sell them the required trucks, generators, electrical power units, trailers, communications equipment, fire unit test & maintenance equipment, system integration and checkout, repair and return, training, and other support.\n\n\n\n\n\nThe Qatar Emiri Air Force was formed in 1974, three years after achieving independence from Great Britain in 1971. Initially equipped with ex-RAF Hawker Hunters, the air force soon began expansion with six Dassault/Dornier Alpha Jets in 1979. Fourteen Dassault Mirage F1 were delivered between 1980-84. After the Gulf War, Qatar's air force infrastructure was upgraded by France for $200 million, leading to the order of nine single seat Mirage 2000-5DEA multi-role combat aircraft and three two seat Mirage 2000-5DDA combat trainers in August 1994. Deliveries started in December 1997, and involved the buy back of the remaining 11 Mirage F1s by France that were later sold on to Spain. The current commander of the Qatar Emiri Air Force is Brigadier General Mubarak Mohammed Al Kumait Al Khayarin.\n\nBritish pilots in Oman remain on duty with the air force, and French specialists are employed in a maintenance capacity. Nevertheless, an increasing number of young Qataris have been trained as pilots and technicians.\n\nIts units include:\n\nAs of January 1993, all the air force's aircraft were based at Doha International Airport.\n\n\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "25195", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25195", "title": "Foreign relations of Qatar", "text": "Foreign relations of Qatar\n\nQatar achieved full independence from the United Kingdom on 3 September 1971. Arab states were among the first to recognize Qatar, and the country gained admittance to the United Nations and the Arab League in the same year. Qatar established diplomatic relations with the Soviet Union, and Communist China in 1988. The country was an early member of OPEC and a founding member of the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC).\n\nOver the past two decades, Qatar has grown its international profile and punched above its weight in international affairs. It has been \"very confident of itself and believes that it has the capabilities and capacity to adopt an independent foreign policy.\" The country is a member of numerous international organizations and maintains bilateral relations around the globe because, as Islam Hassan Research Analyst at Center for International and Regional Studies- Georgetown University in Qatar argues, the monarchy believes that a way of regime survival here is to have recognition on the regional and international level.\" \n\nQatar also uses its massive wealth to purchase influence abroad; its state-funded news media company Al Jazeera serves as a means of exerting international soft power. Qatar buys influence in Western countries through investments and donations. For example, the country has made large donations to the prominent Washington-based think tank the Brookings Institution, purchased British retailer Harrods, and donated $1 million to the Clinton Foundation while Hillary Clinton was U.S. Secretary of State.\n\nSheikh Hamad bin Khalifa Al Thani, the emir of Qatar from 1995 to 2013, helped establish Qatar's reputation as an influential player in Middle East politics. The first major move in this regard was the founding of Al Jazeera., a state-owned news media company.\n\nQatar has also cultivated close relationships with Western powers, particularly the United States and the United Kingdom. Al Udeid Air Base hosts American and British air forces. Qatar has invested extensively in London real estate, and the country has also made donations to prominent research centers in the United States. At the same time, Qatar maintains ties to Western adversaries, including Iran, Hamas, the Muslim Brotherhood, and extremist elements in Syria.\n\nQatar has a population of around 1.8 million people, however only 280,000 of these are citizens. The vast majority of the population are migrant laborers who suffer severe human rights abuses including unfit living conditions, abuse by employers, and seizure of passports and other immigration documents. These human rights abuses have caused tensions between Qatar and liberal western democracies. It is also one of the few countries in which citizens do not have to pay any taxes.\n\nQatar is a member of Organisation of Islamic Cooperation, Gulf Cooperation Council, OPEC and the Council of Arab Economic Unity.\n\nAccording to American sociologist and historical social scientist Immanuel Wallerstein, Qatar is seeking to become a major regional player in Middle East politics. As such, the country played a crucial role in the Libyan Civil War by providing military backing and equipment, media endorsement through Al Jazeera, and diplomatic support by being the second country to recognize the National Transitional Council as the official government of Libya. Wallerstein has argued that Qatar aimed to do the same in the Syrian Civil War, and has provided support to extremist elements in Syria. According to Wallerstein, Qatar and Saudi Arabia are competing for influence in regional politics.\n\nQatar has been influential in political and religious upheavals in the Middle East. Qatar supported several rebel groups during the Arab Spring financially and by asserting global influence through its expanding news group, Al Jazeera.\n\nQatar's support for the Muslim Brotherhood and allied groups throughout the Middle East, as well as positions taken by Al Jazeera have led to increasing tensions with other Gulf States. On 5 March 2014, Saudi Arabia, the UAE, and Bahrain withdrew their ambassadors from Qatar in protest at what they claimed was Qatar's non-compliance with a November 2013 agreement not to \"interfere\" in countries' internal affairs.\n\nSome financial economists have interpreted the 2014 Saudi-Qatari rift as the tangible political sign of a growing economic rivalry between oil and natural gas producers, which could “have deep and long-lasting consequences” beyond the Middle East.\n\nIn March 2014 Qatar made overtures to Oman in order to counteract the influence of Saudi Arabia on politics in the region.\n\nIn April 2017, an alleged hack of state media led to stories quoting the Emir as enquiring US resentment towards Iran and remarking on Hamas. Doha reported it as false and gave no indication on where it originated. However, news organizations in the region reported the emir's comments as fact. This led to Saudi Arabia, UAE, Yemen, Egypt and Bahrain cutting diplomatic ties with Qatar on 5 June 2017.\n\nThe onset of the Arab spring in January 2011 complicated Qatar’s ability to mediate having forced Gulf leaders to side with revolutionaries or the longstanding autocratic regimes. Sheikh Hamad stated in that Qatar would support the uprisings, a position that clashed with neighboring Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates. Qatar provided extensive support, in funding and weapons, to Libyan revolutionaries and aided in the removal of Muammar Gaddafi by mobilising Arab support behind NATO airstrikes. In Egypt, Qatar supported President Mohamed Morsi and has suffered from strained relations with President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi following Morsi’s removal. In Syria, Qatar has provided arms and funding to various opposition groups.\n\nStarting in 2013 Qatar was accused of financing Islamic extremists in Syria, a charge which has been refuted by Emir Sheikh Tamim on CNN and by Foreign Minister Khaled Al-Attiyah in an opinion piece in the British newspaper The Daily Telegraph. According to the Royal United Services Institute, Qatar plays an important role in Syria and Iraq as an interlocutor between Western powers and resistant groups that cannot be engaged directly. This role is consistent with Qatar’s efforts as an interlocutor with the Taliban in Afghanistan, hosting a small Embassy in Doha where US officials are able to meet with the Taliban behind closed doors.\n\nPrior to the abdication of Emir Sheikh Hamad, Qatar’s mediation was fronted by the Qatari Minister of State for Foreign Affairs Ahmad Abdullah Al Mahmud. On 4 May 2009, the Qatari Minister of State for Foreign Affairs Ahmad Abdullah Al Mahmud announced that Chad and Sudan had agreed to end hostilities against each other and to normalize relations during Qatari-mediated talks in Doha; however the agreement quickly broke down. Qatar also brokered an agreement between the Sudanese government and the strongest Darfur rebel group, the Justice and Equality Movement, in Doha in February 2010. The agreement fell apart in May 2010 and the conflict is ongoing.\n\nQatar hosted a donors conference to help rebuild war-ravaged Darfur in April 2013.\n\nIn June 2010, Qatari peacekeeping forces deployed in the disputed Ras Doumeira area on the border between Djibouti and Eritrea after the latter withdrew from the area. The intention was to help start bilateral negotiations and solve the territorial dispute which had turned violent.\n\nIn a controversial bidding process marred by bribery and corruption scandals, Qatar was selected to host the 2022 FIFA World Cup. Qatar will be the first Middle Eastern country to host the popular international sporting event. Qatar-funded Qatar Airways has gone on an aggressive expansion campaign by competing with nearby Emirates Airline to reach more destinations and serve more passengers.\n\nThe sixty-sixth session of the United Nations General Assembly was presided over by former permanent representative of Qatar to the UN Nassir Abdulaziz Al-Nasser. The country has not accepted compulsory International Court of Justice jurisdiction.\n\nIn September 2013, Qatar funded 70% of a US$16 million mosque to be built in Slovenia (the only mosque in that country). It is due for completion in 2016. Due to its natural resource revenue and low indigenous population, Qatar has been able to take bold moves in expanding its global presence, particularly its regional role following the Arab Spring funding the oppositions in the Libyan Civil War and the Syrian civil war, as well as the Islamist government of Egypt (which was opposed by other fellow GCC states).\n\nQatar’s international aid program has expanded dramatically since the beginning of 2010, and focuses heavily on the Arab world, most notably in the humanitarian crises in Syria and Gaza.\n\nAccording to the UN OCHA’s Financial Tracking Service, Qatar’s international aid increased from less than $10 million annually in the pre-Arab Spring period to the hundreds of millions following the event.\n\nFor example in 2012, according to the Qatari Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the country donated more than QAR3 billion (or c. £524 million) through governmental and non-governmental aid to nearly 100 countries across the globe.\n\nQatari leadership has since pledged publicly to reduce suffering of victims and to achieve and support global partnerships for the achievement of foreign countries’ Millennium Development Goals. The state is engaged in investments in a wide range of humanitarian and developmental sectors.\n\nThe territorial dispute with Bahrain over the Hawar Islands and the maritime boundary dispute with Bahrain were solved by the International Court of Justice (ICJ) in The Hague. In the 2001 decision, Bahrain kept the Hawar Islands and Qit'at Jaradah but dropped claims to Janan Island and Zubarah on mainland Qatar, while Qatar retained significant maritime areas and their resources.\n\nOn 5 March 2014, Bahrain withdrew its ambassadors from Qatar to protest Qatar's non-compliance with a November 2013 agreement not to \"interfere\" in countries' internal affairs. The widely accepted cause for this move was Qatar’s support for the organization, the Muslim Brotherhood.\n\nOn 3 June 2017, the Twitter account of Bahraini foreign minister Khalid bin Ahmed Al Khalifa was hacked in a Qatari cyberattack. Two days later, on 5 June, Bahrain announced that it would cut ties with Qatar. Islam Hassan argues that \"Insofar as Bahrain is concerned, the small Kingdom has been toeing the Saudi foreign policy for the past couple of years. It seems that their severing of ties with Qatar was mainly an answer to a Saudi call.\"\n\nQatar and Iran have close ties. Both are members of OPEC, the Non-Aligned Movement, and the Organization of the Islamic Conference. Unlike fellow GCC member states Saudi Arabia and the UAE, Qatar generally refrains from criticizing Iran’s domestic and foreign activities. Qatar has also held several high-level meetings with Iranian officials to discuss security and economic agreements.\n\nIran and Qatar have a close economic relationship, particularly in the oil and gas industries. Iran and Qatar jointly control the world’s largest gas field. In addition to ties in the oil and natural gas arena, Iran and Qatar also cooperate in the shipping sector.\n\nFollowing the 1990–91 Gulf War, in which Qatar and Iraq were on opposing sides, Qatar closed their embassy in Baghdad. They reopened the embassy for the first time twenty-five years in mid-2015. In September 2015, Qatar appointed its ambassador to Iraq.\n\nQatar established trade relations with the State of Israel in 1996. In January 2008 Israeli Defense Minister Ehud Barak met with former Qatari Prime Minister Sheikh Abdullah bin Khalifa al-Thani in Switzerland, at the Davos Economic Forum. The existence of the surreptitious talks has so far been kept secretive by Israel. Despite Qatar's support of Hamas and its good relations with Hezbollah, Israeli leaders have maintained direct contact with the emirate. In January 2007, in his last months as vice premier, Shimon Peres paid a high-profile visit to the capital city of Doha. Peres also visited Qatar in 1996, when he launched the new Israeli trade bureau there.\n\nFollowing the 2008–2009 Israel–Gaza conflict, Qatar hosted an emergency conference of Arab states and Iran to discuss the conflict. The Hamas administration in Gaza, as opposed to the Fatah-controlled Palestinian Authority in the West Bank, represented the Palestinians, undermining support for Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas. Khalid Meshaal, the leader of Hamas, President Bashar al-Assad of Syria, and President Ahmadinejad of Iran urged all Arab states to cut any remaining ties to Israel.\n\nIn 2010, Qatar twice offered to restore trade relations with Israel and allow the reinstatement of the Israeli mission in Doha, on condition that Israel allow Qatar to send building materials and money to Gaza to help rehabilitate infrastructure, and that Israel make a public statement expressing appreciation for Qatar's role and acknowledging its standing in the Middle East. Israel refused, on the grounds that Qatari supplies could be used by Hamas to build bunkers and reinforced positions from which to fire rockets at Israeli cities and towns, and that Israel did not want to get involved in the competition between Qatar and Egypt over the Middle East mediation.\n\nOn 30 April 2013, Qatari Prime Minister Sheikh Hamad bin Jassim al-Thani said that final status agreements with the Palestinians could involve land swaps instead of sticking to the 1967 borders. This was received positively in Israel with Justice Minister Tzipi Livni saying: \"This news is very positive. In the tumultuous world around ... it could allow the Palestinians to enter the room and make the needed compromises and it sends a message to the Israeli public that this is not just about us and the Palestinians\", adding that \"peace between the Palestinians and the Israelis is ... a strategic choice for the Arab states\".\n\nQatar mediated negotiations between leading Lebanese political parties in 2008 during the backdrop of the 2006–08 Lebanese protests. The Doha Agreement was signed by all parties in May after five days of negotiations, resolving the crisis.\n\nIn 2010, the Qatari emir became the first Arab leader to tour South Lebanon and view the various projects it funded following the 2006 Lebanon War. He financed the reconstruction of a hospital in Bint Jbeil and a nearby mosque and church, which he visited while accompanied by Lebanon's President Michel Sleiman and Prime Minister Saad al-Hariri.\n\nIn September 1992, tensions arose between Qatar and Saudi Arabia when Saudi forces allegedly attacked a Qatari border post, resulting in the death of two Qatari soldiers and the imprisonment of a third. Since then, relations have improved, and a joint commission has been set up to demarcate the border as agreed between the two governments. Most, but not all, of the border issues have now been resolved.\n\nIn 2002, Saudi Arabia withdrew its ambassador from Doha due to some reservations over Al Jazeera content. It was not until 2008 that Saudi Arabia reinstated its ambassador to Qatar.\n\nOn 5 March 2014, Saudi Arabia withdrew its ambassadors from Qatar to protest Qatar's non-compliance with a November 2013 agreement not to \"interfere\" in countries' internal affairs. The widely accepted cause for this move was Qatar’s support for the extremist organization, the Muslim Brotherhood.\n\nOn 5 June 2017, Saudi Arabia cut diplomatic relations with Qatar. The move was followed by a number of other countries in the region and beyond.\n\nDuring the Syrian Civil War, Qatar, along with Saudi Arabia, Turkey and western states, vocally and materially supported different rebels with arms and funds against the government. Qatar has been the biggest sponsor of Syrian opposition forces during the civil war.\n\nIn 1995, after Hamad bin Khalifa deposed his father to become emir of Qatar, UAE granted asylum to the deposed Khalifa bin Hamad. Qatar accused UAE, along with Saudi Arabia and Bahrain, of plotting against the new emir, to which the accused countries denied all charges. Several hundred arrests were made in relation to the incident throughout the next two years, and in February 1996, the Qatar Amiri Guard was mobilised.\n\nUAE was one of the three countries which withdrew their ambassadors from Qatar in 2014.\n\nOn 5 June 2017, UAE cut diplomatic ties with Qatar, giving the country's diplomats 48 hours to leave the country. Islam Hassan argues \"there has been always competition between al-Nahyans of Abu Dhabi and al-Thanis of Qatar. This competition goes back to the 1800s. The Arab uprisings ushered a new chapter in the Qatari-Emirati competition. The competition led to the Emiratis playing a major role in the withdrawal of ambassadors from Qatar in 2014. At the beginning of the current diplomatic crisis, particularly after the hacking saga, UAE was trying to maintain the problem. Yet, Al-Jazeera's publishing of Yousuf al-Otaiba's leaked emails got the UAE on board with Saudi Arabia.\"\n\nBilateral relations first began with Egypt in 1972. Lately, relations have not been at its best. Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad Al Thani, Emir of the State of Qatar, has described the 2013 political transition in Egypt as a \"military coup\". It is worth mentioning that the main problem between the two governments is the Qatari support to the Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt.\n\nThe Egyptian government, along with those of Saudi Arabia, Bahrain, and the United Arab Emirates, broke off diplomatic relations with Qatar on 5 June 2017. The Egyptian Foreign Ministry announced it was closing its air and sea ports to Qatari transportation. The Egyptian, Saudi, Bahraini, and Emirati governments cited Qatar's continuing support for \"terrorism\", such as the Muslim Brotherhood. Islam Hassan argues \"Egypt has had troubled relations with Qatar for many years, except of Mohamed MorsiÕsperiod in power. The Egyptian government has seen Qatar as a source of instability. TheEgyptian regime also sees that Qatar challenges its rule by financing the Muslim Brotherhood, and other organizations, which the regime has outlawed and consider terrorist organizations. Thus, the Egyptian regime has been trying to push back on Qatar by any means. The current issue between the Saudi bloc and Qatar seemed to be an opportunity to put pressure on Qatar to stop financing the Muslim Brotherhood, its affiliates, and supporters, and to support the Sisi regime.\"\n\nThe two countries formally established diplomatic ties in 1970.\n\nQatar cut its relations with Zaire due to the latter's reestablishment of the diplomatic ties with Israel in May 1982.\n\n\n\nDuring the waning years of Operation Enduring Freedom in 2010 the United States and the Taliban initiated exploratory talks in regards to ending the conflict in Afghanistan after the latter announced its intention to open an office in Doha. Though they were halted later amid Taliban accusations of malfeasance by the United States, president Hamid Karzai claimed the two parties held daily talks in Qatar, although the U.S.and the Taliban denied it.\n\nIn December 2011, Afghanistan recalled their envoy from Qatar in protest of the newly opened Taliban office. An Afghan government official later claimed that Qatar had not consulted with them prior to the inauguration of the office.\n\nBrunei has an embassy in Doha, and Qatar has an embassy in Bandar Seri Begawan. Relations between the two countries were established on 2 October 1991.\n\nIndia maintains an embassy in Doha, while Qatar maintains an embassy in New Delhi.\n\nIndia and Qatar signed a maritime defence agreement and an information-sharing agreement in November 2008. As part of these agreements, the inaugural India-Qatar Joint Committee on Defence Co-operation meeting was hosted in the Qatari capital Doha in 2008. This was followed by a second meeting in New Delhi in 2011 and a third meeting in Doha in 2013.\n\nIndonesia and Qatar have signed a number of memorandums of understanding in fields like air transport, tourism, and agricultural cooperation.\n\nMalaysia has an embassy in Doha, and Qatar has an embassy in Kuala Lumpur.\n\nThe Nepali ambassador to Qatar, Maya Kumari Sharma, described the emirate as an \"open jail\" in reference to the working conditions of migrant Nepali laborers.\n\nThe Philippines and Qatar established diplomatic relations on 5 May 1981. As of 2014, about 200,000 Filipinos live in Qatar.\n\nOn 8 March 2015, Qatari foreign minister Khalid bin Mohammad Al Attiyah and his South Korean counterpart, Yun Byung-se signed a memorandum of understanding entailing joint diplomatic training between the Diplomatic Institute of Qatar and the Korea National Diplomatic Academy. Emir Tamim bin Hamad Al Thani and South Korean president Park Geun-hye attended the signing ceremony held in Doha. The agreement stipulated the exchange of information regarding diplomatic training, and the extension of opportunities for diplomats to attend educational seminars hosted by the other side.\n\nBoth countries established diplomatic relations on 5 November 1997. Approximately 5,500 Armenians live in Qatar, mostly in the capital Doha.\n\nFrance maintains an embassy in Doha, while Qatar maintains an embassy in Paris. The first bilateral agreement was signed in 1974. Qatar is an associate member of the Organisation internationale de la Francophonie.\n\nQatar and France share strong economic and military ties. France and Qatar have had a defense pact since 1994, and approximately 80% of Qatar's military equipment is imported from France. In May 2015, French President François Hollande and Qatari Emir Tamim bin Hamad Al Thani signed an agreement for Qatar to purchase 24 Dassault Rafale fighter jets to be used for reconnaissance missions.\n\nIn 2012, Qatar became France's seventh largest customer and sixth largest supplier in the Near East. Exports from France focus mainly on the supply of capital goods, deliveries of Airbus aircraft, and trade. Qatar's sovereign wealth fund holds stakes in Vivendi, Lagardère Group, and Vinci SA.\n\nThe history of bilateral relations between Qatar and Turkey date back to the 1970s. In the 1980s, the two nations began signing bilateral agreements with one another. Relations gained further traction in the 2000s with the signing of a further number of bilateral agreements.\n\nQatar and Turkey share similar positions on the Syrian Civil War and the Egyptian Crisis. The two formed a single bloc in the Syrian Civil War and supported the same rebel groups. In the Egyptian Crisis, both Turkey and Qatar were opposed to Abdel Fattah el-Sisi's leadership. Their coordination in regional politics has been described as an alliance. It was announced that Turkey and Qatar agreed to establish a cooperation council called 'High-level Strategic Cooperation Council' on 19 January 2015.\n\nOn 2 December 2015, during a Turkish presidential visit to Qatar, Tamim bin Hamad and Tayyip Erdoğan announced the planned creation of a Turkish military base in Qatar; a first for Turkey in the Persian Gulf.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "25198", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25198", "title": "Quaternary", "text": "Quaternary\n\nQuaternary () is the current and most recent of the three periods of the Cenozoic Era in the geologic time scale of the International Commission on Stratigraphy (ICS). It follows the Neogene Period and spans from 2.588 ± 0.005 million years ago to the present. The Quaternary Period is divided into two epochs: the Pleistocene (2.588 million years ago to 11.7 thousand years ago) and the Holocene (11.7 thousand years ago to today). The informal term \"Late Quaternary\" refers to the past 0.5–1.0 million years.\n\nThe Quaternary Period is typically defined by the cyclic growth and decay of continental ice sheets driven by Milankovitch cycles and the associated climate and environmental changes that occurred.\n\nThe term Quaternary (\"fourth\") was proposed by Giovanni Arduino in 1759 for alluvial deposits in the Po River valley in northern Italy. It was introduced by Jules Desnoyers in 1829 for sediments of France's Seine Basin that seemed clearly to be younger than Tertiary Period rocks.\n\nThe Quaternary Period follows the Neogene Period and extends to the present. The Quaternary covers the time span of glaciations classified as the Pleistocene, and includes the present interglacial time-period, the Holocene.\n\nThis places the start of the Quaternary at the onset of Northern Hemisphere glaciation approximately 2.6 million years ago. Prior to 2009, the Pleistocene was defined to be from 1.805 million years ago to the present, so the current definition of the Pleistocene includes a portion of what was, prior to 2009, defined as the Pliocene.\n\nQuaternary stratigraphers usually worked with regional subdivisions. From the 1970s, the International Commission on Stratigraphy (ICS) tried to make a single geologic time scale based on GSSP's, which could be used internationally. The Quaternary subdivisions were defined based on biostratigraphy instead of paleoclimate.\n\nThis led to the problem that the proposed base of the Pleistocene was at 1.805 Mya, long after the start of the major glaciations of the northern hemisphere. The ICS then proposed to abolish use of the name Quaternary altogether, which appeared unacceptable to the International Union for Quaternary Research (INQUA).\n\nIn 2009, it was decided to make the Quaternary the youngest period of the Cenozoic Era with its base at 2.588 Mya and including the Gelasian stage, which was formerly considered part of the Neogene Period and Pliocene Epoch.\n\nThe Anthropocene has been proposed as a third epoch as a mark of the anthropogenic impact on the global environment starting with the Industrial Revolution, or about 200 years ago. The Anthropocene is not officially designated by the ICS, however, but a working group is currently aiming to complete a proposal for the creation of an epoch or sub-period by 2016.\n\nThe 2.6 million years of the Quaternary represents the time during which recognizable humans existed. Over this short time period, there has been relatively little change in the distribution of the continents due to plate tectonics.\n\nThe Quaternary geological record is preserved in greater detail than that for earlier periods.\n\nThe major geographical changes during this time period included the emergence of the Strait of Bosphorus and Skagerrak during glacial epochs, which respectively turned the Black Sea and Baltic Sea into fresh water, followed by their flooding (and return to salt water) by rising sea level; the periodic filling of the English Channel, forming a land bridge between Britain and the European mainland; the periodic closing of the Bering Strait, forming the land bridge between Asia and North America; and the periodic flash flooding of Scablands of the American Northwest by glacial water.\n\nThe current extent of Hudson Bay, the Great Lakes and other major lakes of North America are a consequence of the Canadian Shield's readjustment since the last ice age; different shorelines have existed over the course of Quaternary time.\n\nThe climate was one of periodic glaciations with continental glaciers moving as far from the poles as 40 degrees latitude. There was a major extinction of large mammals in Northern areas at the end of the Pleistocene Epoch. Many forms such as saber-toothed cats, mammoths, mastodons, glyptodonts, etc., became extinct worldwide. Others, including horses, camels and American cheetahs became extinct in North America.\n\nGlaciation took place repeatedly during the Quaternary Ice Age – a term coined by Schimper in 1839 that began with the start of the Quaternary about 2.58 Mya and continues to the present-day.\n\nIn 1821, a Swiss engineer, Ignaz Venetz, presented an article in which he suggested the presence of traces of the passage of a glacier at a considerable distance from the Alps. This idea was initially disputed by another Swiss scientist, Louis Agassiz, but when he undertook to disprove it, he ended up affirming his colleague's hypothesis. A year later, Agassiz raised the hypothesis of a great glacial period that would have had long-reaching general effects. This idea gained him international fame and led to the establishment of the Glacial Theory.\n\nIn time, thanks to the refinement of geology, it has been demonstrated that there were several periods of glacial advance and retreat and that past temperatures on Earth were very different from today.\nIn particular, the Milankovitch cycles of Milutin Milankovitch are based on the premise that variations in incoming solar radiation are a fundamental factor controlling Earth's climate.\n\nDuring this time, substantial glaciers advanced and retreated over much of North America and Europe, parts of South America and Asia, and all of Antarctica. The Great Lakes formed and giant mammals thrived in parts of North America and Eurasia not covered in ice. These mammals became extinct when the glacial period Age ended about 11,700 years ago. Modern humans evolved about 190,000 years ago. During the Quaternary Period, mammals, flowering plants, and insects dominated the land. \n\n\n\n\nPrecambrian\n"}
{"id": "25199", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25199", "title": "Quotation", "text": "Quotation\n\nA quotation is the repetition of one expression as part of another one, particularly when the quoted expression is well-known or explicitly attributed by citation to its original source, and it is indicated by (punctuated with) quotation marks.\n\nA quotation can also refer to the repeated use of units of any other form of expression, especially parts of artistic works: elements of a painting, scenes from a movie or sections from a musical composition.\n\nQuotations are used for a variety of reasons: to illuminate the meaning or to support the arguments of the work in which it is being quoted, to provide direct information about the work being quoted (whether in order to discuss it, positively or negatively), to pay homage to the original work or author, to make the user of the quotation seem well-read, and/or to comply with copyright law. Quotations are also commonly printed as a means of inspiration and to invoke philosophical thoughts from the reader.\n\nFamous quotations are frequently collected in books that are sometimes called quotation dictionaries or treasuries. Of these, \"Bartlett's Familiar Quotations\", \"The Oxford Dictionary of Quotations\", \"The Columbia Dictionary of Quotations\", \"The Yale Book of Quotations\" and \"The Macmillan Book of Proverbs, Maxims, and Famous Phrases\" are considered among the most reliable and comprehensive sources. Diaries and calendars often include quotations for entertainment or inspirational purposes, and small, dedicated sections in newspapers and weekly magazines—with recent quotations by leading personalities on current topics—have also become commonplace.\n\nChiefly a text medium in the beginning, the World Wide Web gave rise to any number of personal quotation collections that continue to flourish, even though very few of them seem to facilitate accurate information or correct citation.\n\nThe increase of written means of informal communication brought about by the Internet has produced the practice of using quotations as personal flags, as in one's own signature block. This is most commonly seen in email messages and Usenet posts, while it is almost never seen in blog posts. Quotations are also popular as a user's personal message, a line under the user's nickname in some Instant Messaging clients (and here they often go uncited). In all these cases, quotations are usually included to give a glimpse of the user's personality, to make a statement of their beliefs, or to spread views and ideas.\n\nThe sheer bulk of online quotations, combined with more efficient search engines, has effectively made the Internet the world's quotation storehouse, encompassing an unprecedented number of easily obtainable quotations. Though matters of accuracy still remain, features such as Amazon.com's \"Search Inside the Book\" and Google Book Search may serve to alleviate such concerns.\n\nSection 30(1) of the United Kingdom Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988 (apparently in transposition of Article 5(3)(d) of the EU Copyright Directive on quotations) allows fair dealing with a copyrighted work for the purpose of criticism or review, provided that it is accompanied by sufficient acknowledgement.\n\nMany quotations are routinely incorrect or attributed to the wrong authors, and quotations from obscure or unknown writers are often attributed to far more famous writers. Examples of this are Winston Churchill, to whom many political quotations of uncertain origin are attributed, and Oscar Wilde, to whom anonymous humorous quotations are sometimes attributed.\n\nThe \"Star Trek\" catchphrase \"Beam me up, Scotty\" did not appear in that form in the original series. Other misquotations include \"Just the facts, ma'am\" (attributed to Jack Webb's character of Joe Friday on \"Dragnet\"), \"Elementary, my dear Watson\" (attributed to Sherlock Holmes), \"Luke, I am your father\" (attributed to Darth Vader in Star Wars), \"Play it again, Sam\" (attributed to Ilsa in \"Casablanca\"), \"Do you feel lucky, punk?\" (attributed to Harry Callahan in \"Dirty Harry\") and \"We don't need no stinkin' badges!\" (attributed to Gold Hat in \"The Treasure of the Sierra Madre\"). \n\nThe Dirty Harry quotation \"Do you feel lucky, punk?\" is a rewording of the original dialogue: \"You've got to ask yourself one question: 'Do I feel lucky?' Well, do ya, punk?\" Humphrey Bogart's character Rick in \"Casablanca\" never said \"Play it again, Sam.\" The actual expression is \"Play it, Sam.\" Mae West did not say \"Why don't you come up sometime and see me?\" in \"She Done Him Wrong\", but rather \"Why don't you come up and see me sometime?\"\n\n"}
{"id": "25202", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25202", "title": "Quantum mechanics", "text": "Quantum mechanics\n\nQuantum mechanics (QM; also known as quantum physics or quantum theory), including quantum field theory, is a branch of physics which is the fundamental theory of nature at the small scales and energy levels of atoms and subatomic particles.\n\nClassical physics (the physics existing before quantum mechanics) derives from quantum mechanics as an approximation valid only at large (macroscopic) scales. \nQuantum mechanics differs from classical physics in that: energy, momentum and other quantities are often restricted to discrete values (quantization), objects have characteristics of both particles and waves (i.e. wave-particle duality), and there are limits to the precision with which quantities can be known (uncertainty principle).\n\nQuantum mechanics gradually arose from Max Planck's solution in 1900 to the black-body radiation problem, and Albert Einstein's 1905 paper which offered a quantum-based theory to explain the photoelectric effect. Early quantum theory was profoundly re-conceived in the mid-1920s by Erwin Schrodinger, Werner Heisenberg, Max Born and others. The modern theory is formulated in various specially developed mathematical formalisms. In one of them, a mathematical function, the wave function, provides information about the probability amplitude of position, momentum, and other physical properties of a particle.\n\nImportant applications of quantum theory include quantum chemistry, superconducting magnets, light-emitting diodes, and the laser, the transistor and semiconductors such as the microprocessor, medical and research imaging such as magnetic resonance imaging and electron microscopy. Explanations for many biological and physical phenomena are rooted in the nature of the chemical bond, most notably the macro-molecule DNA.\n\nScientific inquiry into the wave nature of light began in the 17th and 18th centuries, when scientists such as Robert Hooke, Christiaan Huygens and Leonhard Euler proposed a wave theory of light based on experimental observations. In 1803, Thomas Young, an English polymath, performed the famous double-slit experiment that he later described in a paper titled \"On the nature of light and colours\". This experiment played a major role in the general acceptance of the wave theory of light.\n\nIn 1838, Michael Faraday discovered cathode rays. These studies were followed by the 1859 statement of the black-body radiation problem by Gustav Kirchhoff, the 1877 suggestion by Ludwig Boltzmann that the energy states of a physical system can be discrete, and the 1900 quantum hypothesis of Max Planck. Planck's hypothesis that energy is radiated and absorbed in discrete \"quanta\" (or energy packets) precisely matched the observed patterns of black-body radiation.\n\nIn 1896, Wilhelm Wien empirically determined a distribution law of black-body radiation, known as Wien's law in his honor. Ludwig Boltzmann independently arrived at this result by considerations of Maxwell's equations. However, it was valid only at high frequencies and underestimated the radiance at low frequencies. Later, Planck corrected this model using Boltzmann's statistical interpretation of thermodynamics and proposed what is now called Planck's law, which led to the development of quantum mechanics.\n\nFollowing Max Planck's solution in 1900 to the black-body radiation problem (reported 1859), Albert Einstein offered a quantum-based theory to explain the photoelectric effect (1905, reported 1887). Around 1900-1910, the atomic theory and the corpuscular theory of light first came to be widely accepted as scientific fact; these latter theories can be viewed as quantum theories of matter and electromagnetic radiation, respectively.\n\nAmong the first to study quantum phenomena in nature were Arthur Compton, C. V. Raman, and Pieter Zeeman, each of whom has a quantum effect named after him. Robert Andrews Millikan studied the photoelectric effect experimentally, and Albert Einstein developed a theory for it. At the same time, Ernest Rutherford experimentally discovered the nuclear model of the atom, for which Niels Bohr developed his theory of the atomic structure, which was later confirmed by the experiments of Henry Moseley. In 1913, Peter Debye extended Niels Bohr's theory of atomic structure, introducing elliptical orbits, a concept also introduced by Arnold Sommerfeld. This phase is known as old quantum theory.\n\nAccording to Planck, each energy element (\"E\")\" \"is proportional to its frequency (\"ν\"):\n\nwhere \"h\" is Planck's constant.\n\nPlanck cautiously insisted that this was simply an aspect of the \"processes\" of absorption and emission of radiation and had nothing to do with the \"physical reality\" of the radiation itself. In fact, he considered his quantum hypothesis a mathematical trick to get the right answer rather than a sizable discovery. However, in 1905 Albert Einstein interpreted Planck's quantum hypothesis realistically and used it to explain the photoelectric effect, in which shining light on certain materials can eject electrons from the material. He won the 1921 Nobel Prize in Physics for this work.\n\nEinstein further developed this idea to show that an electromagnetic wave such as light could also be described as a particle (later called the photon), with a discrete quantum of energy that was dependent on its frequency.\nThe foundations of quantum mechanics were established during the first half of the 20th century by Max Planck, Niels Bohr, Werner Heisenberg, Louis de Broglie, Arthur Compton, Albert Einstein, Erwin Schrödinger, Max Born, John von Neumann, Paul Dirac, Enrico Fermi, Wolfgang Pauli, Max von Laue, Freeman Dyson, David Hilbert, Wilhelm Wien, Satyendra Nath Bose, Arnold Sommerfeld, and . The Copenhagen interpretation of Niels Bohr became widely accepted.\nIn the mid-1920s, developments in quantum mechanics led to its becoming the standard formulation for atomic physics. In the summer of 1925, Bohr and Heisenberg published results that closed the old quantum theory. Out of deference to their particle-like behavior in certain processes and measurements, light quanta came to be called photons (1926). From Einstein's simple postulation was born a flurry of debating, theorizing, and testing. Thus, the entire field of quantum physics emerged, leading to its wider acceptance at the Fifth Solvay Conference in 1927.\n\nIt was found that subatomic particles and electromagnetic waves are neither simply particle nor wave but have certain properties of each. This originated the concept of wave–particle duality.\n\nBy 1930, quantum mechanics had been further unified and formalized by the work of David Hilbert, Paul Dirac and John von Neumann with greater emphasis on measurement, the statistical nature of our knowledge of reality, and philosophical speculation about the 'observer'. It has since permeated many disciplines including quantum chemistry, quantum electronics, quantum optics, and quantum information science. Its speculative modern developments include string theory and quantum gravity theories. It also provides a useful framework for many features of the modern periodic table of elements, and describes the behaviors of atoms during chemical bonding and the flow of electrons in computer semiconductors, and therefore plays a crucial role in many modern technologies.\n\nWhile quantum mechanics was constructed to describe the world of the very small, it is also needed to explain some macroscopic phenomena such as superconductors, and superfluids.\n\nThe word \"quantum\" derives from the Latin, meaning \"how great\" or \"how much\". In quantum mechanics, it refers to a discrete unit assigned to certain physical quantities such as the energy of an atom at rest (see Figure 1). The discovery that particles are discrete packets of energy with wave-like properties led to the branch of physics dealing with atomic and subatomic systems which is today called quantum mechanics. It underlies the mathematical framework of many fields of physics and chemistry, including condensed matter physics, solid-state physics, atomic physics, molecular physics, computational physics, computational chemistry, quantum chemistry, particle physics, nuclear chemistry, and nuclear physics. Some fundamental aspects of the theory are still actively studied.\n\nQuantum mechanics is essential to understanding the behavior of systems at atomic length scales and smaller. If the physical nature of an atom were solely described by classical mechanics, electrons would not \"orbit\" the nucleus, since orbiting electrons emit radiation (due to circular motion) and would eventually collide with the nucleus due to this loss of energy. This framework was unable to explain the stability of atoms. Instead, electrons remain in an uncertain, non-deterministic, \"smeared\", probabilistic wave–particle orbital about the nucleus, defying the traditional assumptions of classical mechanics and electromagnetism.\n\nQuantum mechanics was initially developed to provide a better explanation and description of the atom, especially the differences in the spectra of light emitted by different isotopes of the same chemical element, as well as subatomic particles. In short, the quantum-mechanical atomic model has succeeded spectacularly in the realm where classical mechanics and electromagnetism falter.\n\nBroadly speaking, quantum mechanics incorporates four classes of phenomena for which classical physics cannot account:\n\n\nIn the mathematically rigorous formulation of quantum mechanics developed by Paul Dirac, David Hilbert, John von Neumann, and Hermann Weyl, the possible states of a quantum mechanical system are symbolized as unit vectors (called \"state vectors\"). Formally, these reside in a complex separable Hilbert space—variously called the \"state space\" or the \"associated Hilbert space\" of the system—that is well defined up to a complex number of norm 1 (the phase factor). In other words, the possible states are points in the projective space of a Hilbert space, usually called the complex projective space. The exact nature of this Hilbert space is dependent on the system—for example, the state space for position and momentum states is the space of square-integrable functions, while the state space for the spin of a single proton is just the product of two complex planes. Each observable is represented by a maximally Hermitian (precisely: by a self-adjoint) linear operator acting on the state space. Each eigenstate of an observable corresponds to an eigenvector of the operator, and the associated eigenvalue corresponds to the value of the observable in that eigenstate. If the operator's spectrum is discrete, the observable can attain only those discrete eigenvalues.\n\nIn the formalism of quantum mechanics, the state of a system at a given time is described by a complex wave function, also referred to as state vector in a complex vector space. This abstract mathematical object allows for the calculation of probabilities of outcomes of concrete experiments. For example, it allows one to compute the probability of finding an electron in a particular region around the nucleus at a particular time. Contrary to classical mechanics, one can never make simultaneous predictions of conjugate variables, such as position and momentum, to arbitrary precision. For instance, electrons may be considered (to a certain probability) to be located somewhere within a given region of space, but with their exact positions unknown. Contours of constant probability, often referred to as \"clouds\", may be drawn around the nucleus of an atom to conceptualize where the electron might be located with the most probability. Heisenberg's uncertainty principle quantifies the inability to precisely locate the particle given its conjugate momentum.\n\nAccording to one interpretation, as the result of a measurement the wave function containing the probability information for a system collapses from a given initial state to a particular eigenstate. The possible results of a measurement are the eigenvalues of the operator representing the observable—which explains the choice of \"Hermitian\" operators, for which all the eigenvalues are real. The probability distribution of an observable in a given state can be found by computing the spectral decomposition of the corresponding operator. Heisenberg's uncertainty principle is represented by the statement that the operators corresponding to certain observables do not commute.\n\nThe probabilistic nature of quantum mechanics thus stems from the act of measurement. This is one of the most difficult aspects of quantum systems to understand. It was the central topic in the famous Bohr–Einstein debates, in which the two scientists attempted to clarify these fundamental principles by way of thought experiments. In the decades after the formulation of quantum mechanics, the question of what constitutes a \"measurement\" has been extensively studied. Newer interpretations of quantum mechanics have been formulated that do away with the concept of \"wave function collapse\" (see, for example, the relative state interpretation). The basic idea is that when a quantum system interacts with a measuring apparatus, their respective wave functions become entangled, so that the original quantum system ceases to exist as an independent entity. For details, see the article on measurement in quantum mechanics.\n\nGenerally, quantum mechanics does not assign definite values. Instead, it makes a prediction using a probability distribution; that is, it describes the probability of obtaining the possible outcomes from measuring an observable. Often these results are skewed by many causes, such as dense probability clouds. Probability clouds are approximate (but better than the Bohr model) whereby electron location is given by a probability function, the wave function eigenvalue, such that the probability is the squared modulus of the complex amplitude, or quantum state nuclear attraction. Naturally, these probabilities will depend on the quantum state at the \"instant\" of the measurement. Hence, uncertainty is involved in the value. There are, however, certain states that are associated with a definite value of a particular observable. These are known as eigenstates of the observable (\"eigen\" can be translated from German as meaning \"inherent\" or \"characteristic\").\n\nIn the everyday world, it is natural and intuitive to think of everything (every observable) as being in an eigenstate. Everything appears to have a definite position, a definite momentum, a definite energy, and a definite time of occurrence. However, quantum mechanics does not pinpoint the exact values of a particle's position and momentum (since they are conjugate pairs) or its energy and time (since they too are conjugate pairs); rather, it provides only a range of probabilities in which that particle might be given its momentum and momentum probability. Therefore, it is helpful to use different words to describe states having \"uncertain\" values and states having \"definite\" values (eigenstates). Usually, a system will not be in an eigenstate of the observable (particle) we are interested in. However, if one measures the observable, the wave function will instantaneously be an eigenstate (or \"generalized\" eigenstate) of that observable. This process is known as wave function collapse, a controversial and much-debated process that involves expanding the system under study to include the measurement device. If one knows the corresponding wave function at the instant before the measurement, one will be able to compute the probability of the wave function collapsing into each of the possible eigenstates. For example, the free particle in the previous example will usually have a wave function that is a wave packet centered around some mean position \"x\" (neither an eigenstate of position nor of momentum). When one measures the position of the particle, it is impossible to predict with certainty the result. It is probable, but not certain, that it will be near \"x\", where the amplitude of the wave function is large. After the measurement is performed, having obtained some result \"x\", the wave function collapses into a position eigenstate centered at \"x\".\n\nThe time evolution of a quantum state is described by the Schrödinger equation, in which the Hamiltonian (the operator corresponding to the total energy of the system) generates the time evolution. The time evolution of wave functions is deterministic in the sense that - given a wave function at an \"initial\" time - it makes a definite prediction of what the wave function will be at any \"later\" time.\n\nDuring a measurement, on the other hand, the change of the initial wave function into another, later wave function is not deterministic, it is unpredictable (i.e., random). A time-evolution simulation can be seen here.\n\nWave functions change as time progresses. The Schrödinger equation describes how wave functions change in time, playing a role similar to Newton's second law in classical mechanics. The Schrödinger equation, applied to the aforementioned example of the free particle, predicts that the center of a wave packet will move through space at a constant velocity (like a classical particle with no forces acting on it). However, the wave packet will also spread out as time progresses, which means that the position becomes more uncertain with time. This also has the effect of turning a position eigenstate (which can be thought of as an infinitely sharp wave packet) into a broadened wave packet that no longer represents a (definite, certain) position eigenstate.\n\nSome wave functions produce probability distributions that are constant, or independent of time—such as when in a stationary state of constant energy, time vanishes in the absolute square of the wave function. Many systems that are treated dynamically in classical mechanics are described by such \"static\" wave functions. For example, a single electron in an unexcited atom is pictured classically as a particle moving in a circular trajectory around the atomic nucleus, whereas in quantum mechanics it is described by a static, spherically symmetric wave function surrounding the nucleus () (note, however, that only the lowest angular momentum states, labeled \"s\", are spherically symmetric).\n\nThe Schrödinger equation acts on the \"entire\" probability amplitude, not merely its absolute value. Whereas the absolute value of the probability amplitude encodes information about probabilities, its phase encodes information about the interference between quantum states. This gives rise to the \"wave-like\" behavior of quantum states. As it turns out, analytic solutions of the Schrödinger equation are available for only a very small number of relatively simple model Hamiltonians, of which the quantum harmonic oscillator, the particle in a box, the dihydrogen cation, and the hydrogen atom are the most important representatives. Even the helium atom—which contains just one more electron than does the hydrogen atom—has defied all attempts at a fully analytic treatment.\n\nThere exist several techniques for generating approximate solutions, however. In the important method known as perturbation theory, one uses the analytic result for a simple quantum mechanical model to generate a result for a more complicated model that is related to the simpler model by (for one example) the addition of a weak potential energy. Another method is the \"semi-classical equation of motion\" approach, which applies to systems for which quantum mechanics produces only weak (small) deviations from classical behavior. These deviations can then be computed based on the classical motion. This approach is particularly important in the field of quantum chaos.\n\nThere are numerous mathematically equivalent formulations of quantum mechanics. One of the oldest and most commonly used formulations is the \"transformation theory\" proposed by Paul Dirac, which unifies and generalizes the two earliest formulations of quantum mechanics - matrix mechanics (invented by Werner Heisenberg) and wave mechanics (invented by Erwin Schrödinger).\n\nEspecially since Werner Heisenberg was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1932 for the creation of quantum mechanics, the role of Max Born in the development of QM was overlooked until the 1954 Nobel award. The role is noted in a 2005 biography of Born, which recounts his role in the matrix formulation of quantum mechanics, and the use of probability amplitudes. Heisenberg himself acknowledges having learned matrices from Born, as published in a 1940 \"festschrift\" honoring Max Planck. In the matrix formulation, the instantaneous state of a quantum system encodes the probabilities of its measurable properties, or \"observables\". Examples of observables include energy, position, momentum, and angular momentum. Observables can be either continuous (e.g., the position of a particle) or discrete (e.g., the energy of an electron bound to a hydrogen atom). An alternative formulation of quantum mechanics is Feynman's path integral formulation, in which a quantum-mechanical amplitude is considered as a sum over all possible classical and non-classical paths between the initial and final states. This is the quantum-mechanical counterpart of the action principle in classical mechanics.\n\nThe rules of quantum mechanics are fundamental. They assert that the state space of a system is a Hilbert space (crucially, that the space has an inner product) and that observables of that system are Hermitian operators acting on vectors in that space—although they do not tell us which Hilbert space or which operators. These can be chosen appropriately in order to obtain a quantitative description of a quantum system. An important guide for making these choices is the correspondence principle, which states that the predictions of quantum mechanics reduce to those of classical mechanics when a system moves to higher energies or, equivalently, larger quantum numbers, i.e. whereas a single particle exhibits a degree of randomness, in systems incorporating millions of particles averaging takes over and, at the high energy limit, the statistical probability of random behaviour approaches zero. In other words, classical mechanics is simply a quantum mechanics of large systems. This \"high energy\" limit is known as the \"classical\" or \"correspondence limit\". One can even start from an established classical model of a particular system, then attempt to guess the underlying quantum model that would give rise to the classical model in the correspondence limit.\nWhen quantum mechanics was originally formulated, it was applied to models whose\ncorrespondence limit was non-relativistic classical mechanics. For instance, the well-known model of the quantum harmonic oscillator uses an explicitly non-relativistic expression for the kinetic energy of the oscillator, and is thus a quantum version of the classical harmonic oscillator.\n\nEarly attempts to merge quantum mechanics with special relativity involved the replacement of the Schrödinger equation with a covariant equation such as the Klein–Gordon equation or the Dirac equation. While these theories were successful in explaining many experimental results, they had certain unsatisfactory qualities stemming from their neglect of the relativistic creation and annihilation of particles. A fully relativistic quantum theory required the development of quantum field theory, which applies quantization to a field (rather than a fixed set of particles). The first complete quantum field theory, quantum electrodynamics, provides a fully quantum description of the electromagnetic interaction. The full apparatus of quantum field theory is often unnecessary for describing electrodynamic systems. A simpler approach, one that has been employed since the inception of quantum mechanics, is to treat charged particles as quantum mechanical objects being acted on by a classical electromagnetic field. For example, the elementary quantum model of the hydrogen atom describes the electric field of the hydrogen atom using a classical formula_2 Coulomb potential. This \"semi-classical\" approach fails if quantum fluctuations in the electromagnetic field play an important role, such as in the emission of photons by charged particles.\n\nQuantum field theories for the strong nuclear force and the weak nuclear force have also been developed. The quantum field theory of the strong nuclear force is called quantum chromodynamics, and describes the interactions of subnuclear particles such as quarks and gluons. The weak nuclear force and the electromagnetic force were unified, in their quantized forms, into a single quantum field theory (known as electroweak theory), by the physicists Abdus Salam, Sheldon Glashow and Steven Weinberg. These three men shared the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1979 for this work.\n\nIt has proven difficult to construct quantum models of gravity, the remaining fundamental force. Semi-classical approximations are workable, and have led to predictions such as Hawking radiation. However, the formulation of a complete theory of quantum gravity is hindered by apparent incompatibilities between general relativity (the most accurate theory of gravity currently known) and some of the fundamental assumptions of quantum theory. The resolution of these incompatibilities is an area of active research, and theories such as string theory are among the possible candidates for a future theory of quantum gravity.\n\nClassical mechanics has also been extended into the complex domain, with complex classical mechanics exhibiting behaviors similar to quantum mechanics.\n\nPredictions of quantum mechanics have been verified experimentally to an extremely high degree of accuracy. According to the correspondence principle between classical and quantum mechanics, all objects obey the laws of quantum mechanics, and classical mechanics is just an approximation for large systems of objects (or a statistical quantum mechanics of a large collection of particles). The laws of classical mechanics thus follow from the laws of quantum mechanics as a statistical average at the limit of large systems or large quantum numbers. However, chaotic systems do not have good quantum numbers, and quantum chaos studies the relationship between classical and quantum descriptions in these systems.\n\nQuantum coherence is an essential difference between classical and quantum theories as illustrated by the Einstein–Podolsky–Rosen (EPR) paradox — an attack on a certain philosophical interpretation of quantum mechanics by an appeal to local realism. Quantum interference involves adding together \"probability amplitudes\", whereas classical \"waves\" infer that there is an adding together of \"intensities\". For microscopic bodies, the extension of the system is much smaller than the coherence length, which gives rise to long-range entanglement and other nonlocal phenomena characteristic of quantum systems. Quantum coherence is not typically evident at macroscopic scales, though an exception to this rule may occur at extremely low temperatures (i.e. approaching absolute zero) at which quantum behavior may manifest itself macroscopically. This is in accordance with the following observations:\n\nA big difference between classical and quantum mechanics is that they use very different kinematic descriptions.\n\nIn Niels Bohr's mature view, quantum mechanical phenomena are required to be experiments, with complete descriptions of all the devices for the system, preparative, intermediary, and finally measuring. The descriptions are in macroscopic terms, expressed in ordinary language, supplemented with the concepts of classical mechanics. The initial condition and the final condition of the system are respectively described by values in a configuration space, for example a position space, or some equivalent space such as a momentum space. Quantum mechanics does not admit a completely precise description, in terms of both position and momentum, of an initial condition or \"state\" (in the classical sense of the word) that would support a precisely deterministic and causal prediction of a final condition. In this sense, advocated by Bohr in his mature writings, a quantum phenomenon is a process, a passage from initial to final condition, not an instantaneous \"state\" in the classical sense of that word. Thus there are two kinds of processes in quantum mechanics: stationary and transitional. For a stationary process, the initial and final condition are the same. For a transition, they are different. Obviously by definition, if only the initial condition is given, the process is not determined. Given its initial condition, prediction of its final condition is possible, causally but only probabilistically, because the Schrödinger equation is deterministic for wave function evolution, but the wave function describes the system only probabilistically.\n\nFor many experiments, it is possible to think of the initial and final conditions of the system as being a particle. In some cases it appears that there are potentially several spatially distinct pathways or trajectories by which a particle might pass from initial to final condition. It is an important feature of the quantum kinematic description that it does not permit a unique definite statement of which of those pathways is actually followed. Only the initial and final conditions are definite, and, as stated in the foregoing paragraph, they are defined only as precisely as allowed by the configuration space description or its equivalent. In every case for which a quantum kinematic description is needed, there is always a compelling reason for this restriction of kinematic precision. An example of such a reason is that for a particle to be experimentally found in a definite position, it must be held motionless; for it to be experimentally found to have a definite momentum, it must have free motion; these two are logically incompatible.\n\nClassical kinematics does not primarily demand experimental description of its phenomena. It allows completely precise description of an instantaneous state by a value in phase space, the Cartesian product of configuration and momentum spaces. This description simply assumes or imagines a state as a physically existing entity without concern about its experimental measurability. Such a description of an initial condition, together with Newton's laws of motion, allows a precise deterministic and causal prediction of a final condition, with a definite trajectory of passage. Hamiltonian dynamics can be used for this. Classical kinematics also allows the description of a process analogous to the initial and final condition description used by quantum mechanics. Lagrangian mechanics applies to this. For processes that need account to be taken of actions of a small number of Planck constants, classical kinematics is not adequate; quantum mechanics is needed.\n\nEven with the defining postulates of both Einstein's theory of general relativity and quantum theory being indisputably supported by rigorous and repeated empirical evidence, and while they do not directly contradict each other theoretically (at least with regard to their primary claims), they have proven extremely difficult to incorporate into one consistent, cohesive model.\n\nGravity is negligible in many areas of particle physics, so that unification between general relativity and quantum mechanics is not an urgent issue in those particular applications. However, the lack of a correct theory of quantum gravity is an important issue in physical cosmology and the search by physicists for an elegant \"Theory of Everything\" (TOE). Consequently, resolving the inconsistencies between both theories has been a major goal of 20th and 21st century physics. Many prominent physicists, including Stephen Hawking, have labored for many years in the attempt to discover a theory underlying \"everything\". This TOE would combine not only the different models of subatomic physics, but also derive the four fundamental forces of nature - the strong force, electromagnetism, the weak force, and gravity - from a single force or phenomenon. While Stephen Hawking was initially a believer in the Theory of Everything, after considering Gödel's Incompleteness Theorem, he has concluded that one is not obtainable, and has stated so publicly in his lecture \"Gödel and the End of Physics\" (2002).\n\nThe quest to unify the fundamental forces through quantum mechanics is still ongoing. Quantum electrodynamics (or \"quantum electromagnetism\"), which is currently (in the perturbative regime at least) the most accurately tested physical theory in competition with general relativity, has been successfully merged with the weak nuclear force into the electroweak force and work is currently being done to merge the electroweak and strong force into the electrostrong force. Current predictions state that at around 10 GeV the three aforementioned forces are fused into a single unified field. Beyond this \"grand unification\", it is speculated that it may be possible to merge gravity with the other three gauge symmetries, expected to occur at roughly 10 GeV. However — and while special relativity is parsimoniously incorporated into quantum electrodynamics — the expanded general relativity, currently the best theory describing the gravitation force, has not been fully incorporated into quantum theory. One of those searching for a coherent TOE is Edward Witten, a theoretical physicist who formulated the M-theory, which is an attempt at describing the supersymmetrical based string theory. M-theory posits that our apparent 4-dimensional spacetime is, in reality, actually an 11-dimensional spacetime containing 10 spatial dimensions and 1 time dimension, although 7 of the spatial dimensions are - at lower energies - completely \"compactified\" (or infinitely curved) and not readily amenable to measurement or probing.\n\nAnother popular theory is Loop quantum gravity (LQG), a theory first proposed by Carlo Rovelli that describes the quantum properties of gravity. It is also a theory of quantum space and quantum time, because in general relativity the geometry of spacetime is a manifestation of gravity. LQG is an attempt to merge and adapt standard quantum mechanics and standard general relativity. The main output of the theory is a physical picture of space where space is granular. The granularity is a direct consequence of the quantization. It has the same nature of the granularity of the photons in the quantum theory of electromagnetism or the discrete levels of the energy of the atoms. But here it is space itself which is discrete.\nMore precisely, space can be viewed as an extremely fine fabric or network \"woven\" of finite loops. These networks of loops are called spin networks. The evolution of a spin network over time is called a spin foam. The predicted size of this structure is the Planck length, which is approximately 1.616×10 m. According to theory, there is no meaning to length shorter than this (cf. Planck scale energy). Therefore, LQG predicts that not just matter, but also space itself, has an atomic structure.\n\nSince its inception, the many counter-intuitive aspects and results of quantum mechanics have provoked strong philosophical debates and many interpretations. Even fundamental issues, such as Max Born's basic rules concerning probability amplitudes and probability distributions, took decades to be appreciated by society and many leading scientists. Richard Feynman once said, \"I think I can safely say that nobody understands quantum mechanics.\" According to Steven Weinberg, \"There is now in my opinion no entirely satisfactory interpretation of quantum mechanics.\"\n\nThe Copenhagen interpretation — due largely to Niels Bohr and Werner Heisenberg — remains most widely accepted amongst physicists, some 75 years after its enunciation. According to this interpretation, the probabilistic nature of quantum mechanics is not a \"temporary\" feature which will eventually be replaced by a deterministic theory, but instead must be considered a \"final\" renunciation of the classical idea of \"causality.\" It is also believed therein that any well-defined application of the quantum mechanical formalism must always make reference to the experimental arrangement, due to the conjugate nature of evidence obtained under different experimental situations.\n\nAlbert Einstein, himself one of the founders of quantum theory, did not accept some of the more philosophical or metaphysical interpretations of quantum mechanics, such as rejection of determinism and of causality. He is famously quoted as saying, in response to this aspect, \"God does not play with dice\". He rejected the concept that the state of a physical system depends on the experimental arrangement for its measurement. He held that a state of nature occurs in its own right, regardless of whether or how it might be observed. In that view, he is supported by the currently accepted definition of a quantum state, which remains invariant under arbitrary choice of configuration space for its representation, that is to say, manner of observation. He also held that underlying quantum mechanics there should be a theory that thoroughly and directly expresses the rule against action at a distance; in other words, he insisted on the principle of locality. He considered, but rejected on theoretical grounds, a particular proposal for hidden variables to obviate the indeterminism or acausality of quantum mechanical measurement. He considered that quantum mechanics was a currently valid but not a permanently definitive theory for quantum phenomena. He thought its future replacement would require profound conceptual advances, and would not come quickly or easily. The Bohr-Einstein debates provide a vibrant critique of the Copenhagen Interpretation from an epistemological point of view. In arguing for his views, he produced a series of objections, the most famous of which has become known as the Einstein–Podolsky–Rosen paradox.\n\nJohn Bell showed that this \"EPR\" paradox led to experimentally testable differences between quantum mechanics and theories that rely on added hidden variables. Experiments have been performed confirming the accuracy of quantum mechanics, thereby demonstrating that quantum mechanics cannot be improved upon by addition of hidden variables. Alain Aspect's initial experiments in 1982, and many subsequent experiments since, have definitively verified quantum entanglement.\n\nEntanglement, as demonstrated in Bell-type experiments, does not, however, violate causality, since no transfer of information happens. Quantum entanglement forms the basis of quantum cryptography, which is proposed for use in high-security commercial applications in banking and government.\n\nThe Everett many-worlds interpretation, formulated in 1956, holds that \"all\" the possibilities described by quantum theory \"simultaneously\" occur in a multiverse composed of mostly independent parallel universes. This is not accomplished by introducing some \"new axiom\" to quantum mechanics, but on the contrary, by \"removing\" the axiom of the collapse of the wave packet. \"All\" of the possible consistent states of the measured system and the measuring apparatus (including the observer) are present in a \"real\" physical - not just formally mathematical, as in other interpretations - quantum superposition. Such a superposition of consistent state combinations of different systems is called an entangled state. While the multiverse is deterministic, we perceive non-deterministic behavior governed by probabilities, because we can only observe the universe (i.e., the consistent state contribution to the aforementioned superposition) that we, as observers, inhabit. Everett's interpretation is perfectly consistent with John Bell's experiments and makes them intuitively understandable. However, according to the theory of quantum decoherence, these \"parallel universes\" will never be accessible to us. The inaccessibility can be understood as follows: once a measurement is done, the measured system becomes entangled with \"both\" the physicist who measured it \"and\" a huge number of other particles, some of which are photons flying away at the speed of light towards the other end of the universe. In order to prove that the wave function did not collapse, one would have to bring \"all\" these particles back and measure them again, together with the system that was originally measured. Not only is this completely impractical, but even if one \"could\" theoretically do this, it would have to destroy any evidence that the original measurement took place (including the physicist's memory). In light of these Bell tests, Cramer (1986) formulated his transactional interpretation. Relational quantum mechanics appeared in the late 1990s as the modern derivative of the Copenhagen Interpretation.\n\nQuantum mechanics has had enormous success in explaining many of the features of our universe. Quantum mechanics is often the only tool available that can reveal the individual behaviors of the subatomic particles that make up all forms of matter (electrons, protons, neutrons, photons, and others). Quantum mechanics has strongly influenced string theories, candidates for a Theory of Everything (see reductionism).\n\nQuantum mechanics is also critically important for understanding how individual atoms combine covalently to form molecules. The application of quantum mechanics to chemistry is known as quantum chemistry. Relativistic quantum mechanics can, in principle, mathematically describe most of chemistry. Quantum mechanics can also provide quantitative insight into ionic and covalent bonding processes by explicitly showing which molecules are energetically favorable to which others and the magnitudes of the energies involved. Furthermore, most of the calculations performed in modern computational chemistry rely on quantum mechanics.\n\nIn many aspects modern technology operates at a scale where quantum effects are significant.\n\nMany modern electronic devices are designed using quantum mechanics. Examples include the laser, the transistor (and thus the microchip), the electron microscope, and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). The study of semiconductors led to the invention of the diode and the transistor, which are indispensable parts of modern electronics systems, computer and telecommunication devices. Another application is the light emitting diode which is a high-efficiency source of light.\nMany electronic devices operate under effect of quantum tunneling. It even exists in the simple light switch. The switch would not work if electrons could not quantum tunnel through the layer of oxidation on the metal contact surfaces. Flash memory chips found in USB drives use quantum tunneling to erase their memory cells. Some negative differential resistance devices also utilize quantum tunneling effect, such as resonant tunneling diode. Unlike classical diodes, its current is carried by resonant tunneling through two potential barriers (see right figure). Its negative resistance behavior can only be understood with quantum mechanics: As the confined state moves close to Fermi level, tunnel current increases. As it moves away, current decreases. Quantum mechanics is vital to understanding and designing such electronic devices.\n\nResearchers are currently seeking robust methods of directly manipulating quantum states. Efforts are being made to more fully develop quantum cryptography, which will theoretically allow guaranteed secure transmission of information.\n\nAn inherent advantage yielded by quantum cryptography when compared to classical cryptography is the detection of passive eavesdropping. This is a natural result of the behavior of quantum bits; due to the observer effect, if a bit in a superposition state were to be observed, the superposition state would collapse into an eigenstate. Because the intended recipient was expecting to receive the bit in a superposition state, the intended recipient would know there was an attack, because the bit's state would no longer be in a superposition.\n\nA more distant goal is the development of quantum computers, which are expected to perform certain computational tasks exponentially faster than classical computers. Instead of using classical bits, quantum computers use qubits, which can be in superpositions of states. Quantum programmers are able to manipulate the superposition of qubits in order to solve problems that classical computing cannot do effectively, such as searching unsorted databases or integer factorization. IBM claims that the advent of quantum computing may progress the fields of medicine, logistics, financial services, artificial intelligence and cloud security.\n\nAnother active research topic is quantum teleportation, which deals with techniques to transmit quantum information over arbitrary distances.\n\nWhile quantum mechanics primarily applies to the smaller atomic regimes of matter and energy, some systems exhibit quantum mechanical effects on a large scale. Superfluidity, the frictionless flow of a liquid at temperatures near absolute zero, is one well-known example. So is the closely related phenomenon of superconductivity, the frictionless flow of an electron gas in a conducting material (an electric current) at sufficiently low temperatures. The fractional quantum Hall effect is a topological ordered state which corresponds to patterns of long-range quantum entanglement. States with different topological orders (or different patterns of long range entanglements) cannot change into each other without a phase transition.\n\nQuantum theory also provides accurate descriptions for many previously unexplained phenomena, such as black-body radiation and the stability of the orbitals of electrons in atoms. It has also given insight into the workings of many different biological systems, including smell receptors and protein structures. Recent work on photosynthesis has provided evidence that quantum correlations play an essential role in this fundamental process of plants and many other organisms. Even so, classical physics can often provide good approximations to results otherwise obtained by quantum physics, typically in circumstances with large numbers of particles or large quantum numbers. Since classical formulas are much simpler and easier to compute than quantum formulas, classical approximations are used and preferred when the system is large enough to render the effects of quantum mechanics insignificant.\n\nFor example, consider a free particle. In quantum mechanics, there is wave–particle duality, so the properties of the particle can be described as the properties of a wave. Therefore, its quantum state can be represented as a wave of arbitrary shape and extending over space as a wave function. The position and momentum of the particle are observables. The Uncertainty Principle states that both the position and the momentum cannot simultaneously be measured with complete precision. However, one \"can\" measure the position (alone) of a moving free particle, creating an eigenstate of position with a wave function that is very large (a Dirac delta) at a particular position \"x\", and zero everywhere else. If one performs a position measurement on such a wave function, the resultant \"x\" will be obtained with 100% probability (i.e., with full certainty, or complete precision). This is called an eigenstate of position—or, stated in mathematical terms, a \"generalized position eigenstate (eigendistribution)\". If the particle is in an eigenstate of position, then its momentum is completely unknown. On the other hand, if the particle is in an eigenstate of momentum, then its position is completely unknown.\nIn an eigenstate of momentum having a plane wave form, it can be shown that the wavelength is equal to \"h/p\", where \"h\" is Planck's constant and \"p\" is the momentum of the eigenstate.\n\nThe potential in this case is given by:\n\nThe solutions are superpositions of left- and right-moving waves:\n\nwhere the wave vectors are related to the energy via\n\nwith coefficients A and B determined from the boundary conditions and by imposing a continuous derivative on the solution.\n\nEach term of the solution can be interpreted as an incident, reflected, or transmitted component of the wave, allowing the calculation of transmission and reflection coefficients. Notably, in contrast to classical mechanics, incident particles with energies greater than the potential step are partially reflected.\n\nThis is a model for the quantum tunneling effect which plays an important role in the performance of modern technologies such as flash memory and scanning tunneling microscopy. Quantum tunneling is central to physical phenomena involved in superlattices.\n\nThe particle in a one-dimensional potential energy box is the most mathematically simple example where restraints lead to the quantization of energy levels. The box is defined as having zero potential energy everywhere \"inside\" a certain region, and infinite potential energy everywhere \"outside\" that region. For the one-dimensional case in the formula_8 direction, the time-independent Schrödinger equation may be written\n\nWith the differential operator defined by\n\nthe previous equation is evocative of the classic kinetic energy analogue,\n\nwith state formula_12 in this case having energy formula_13 coincident with the kinetic energy of the particle.\n\nThe general solutions of the Schrödinger equation for the particle in a box are\n\nor, from Euler's formula,\n\nThe infinite potential walls of the box determine the values of \"C\", \"D\", and \"k\" at and where must be zero. Thus, at ,\n\nand . At ,\n\nin which \"C\" cannot be zero as this would conflict with the Born interpretation. Therefore, since , \"kL\" must be an integer multiple of π,\n\nThe quantization of energy levels follows from this constraint on \"k\", since\n\nA finite potential well is the generalization of the infinite potential well problem to potential wells having finite depth.\n\nThe finite potential well problem is mathematically more complicated than the infinite particle-in-a-box problem as the wave function is not pinned to zero at the walls of the well. Instead, the wave function must satisfy more complicated mathematical boundary conditions as it is nonzero in regions outside the well.\n\nAs in the classical case, the potential for the quantum harmonic oscillator is given by\n\nThis problem can either be treated by directly solving the Schrödinger equation, which is not trivial, or by using the more elegant \"ladder method\" first proposed by Paul Dirac. The eigenstates are given by\n\nwhere \"H\" are the Hermite polynomials\n\nand the corresponding energy levels are\n\nThis is another example illustrating the quantification of energy for bound states.\n\nThe following titles, all by working physicists, attempt to communicate quantum theory to lay people, using a minimum of technical apparatus.\nMore technical:\n\nOn Wikibooks\n\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "25203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25203", "title": "Quilting", "text": "Quilting\n\nQuilting is the process of sewing two or more layers of fabric together to make a thicker padded material, usually to create a quilt or quilted garment. Typically quilting is done with three layers: the top fabric or quilt top, batting or insulating material and backing material, but many different styles are adopted.\n\nThe process of quilting uses a needle and thread to join two or more layers of material to make a quilt. The quilter's hand or sewing machine passes the needle and thread through all layers and then brings the needle back up. The process is repeated across the entire area where quilting is wanted. Rocking, straight or running stitches are commonly used with these stitches being purely functional or decorative. Quilting is done to create bed spreads, art quilt wall hangings, clothing, and a variety of textile products. Quilting can make a project thick, or with dense quilting, can raise one area so that another stands out.\n\nThe whole process of creating a quilt or quilted garment also involves other steps such as designing, piecing, appliqué, and binding. A person who works at quilting is termed a quilter. Quilting can be done by hand, via a sewing machine, or by a specialized longarm quilting system.\n\nQuilt stores often sell fabric, thread, patterns and other goods that are used for quilting. They often have group sewing and quilting classes where one can learn how to sew or quilt.\n\nThe word \"quilt\" comes from the Latin \"culcita\" meaning a stuffed sack but it came into the English language from the French word \"cuilte\". The origins of quilting remain unknown but sewing techniques of piecing, appliqué, and quilting have been used for clothing and furnishings in diverse parts of the world for several millennia. The earliest known quilted garment is depicted on the carved ivory figure of a Pharaoh dating from the ancient Egyptian First Dynasty (~3400 BC). In 1924 archaeologists discovered a quilted floor covering in Mongolia. They estimated its date as between 100 BC to 200 AD. Chinese patchwork continues as an folk art.\n\nThere are numerous references to quilts in literature and inventories of estates. Crusaders brought quilted objects from the Middle East to Europe in the late 11th century. Quilted garments known as gambesons were popular in the European Middle Ages. Knights wore them under their armor for comfort and sometimes as an outer garment to protect the metal armor from the weather. The earliest known surviving European bed quilt is from late fourteenth century Sicily. It is made of linen and padded with wool. The blocks across the center are scenes from the legend of Tristan. The quilt is 122\" by 106\" and is in the Victoria and Albert Museum in London.\n\nQuilting has been part of the needlework tradition in Europe from about the 5th century. Early objects contain Egyptian cotton, which may indicate that Egyptian and Mediterranean trade provided a conduit for the technique. Quilted objects were relatively rare in Europe until approximately the twelfth century, when quilted bedding and other items appeared after the return of the Crusaders from the Middle East. The medieval quilted gambeson, aketon and arming doublet were garments worn under or instead of armor of maille or plate armor. These developed into the later quilted doublet worn as part of fashionable European male clothing from the fourteenth to seventeenth century. Quilting clothing began to be generally used in the fourteenth century, with quilted doublets and armor worn in France, Germany, and England and quilted tunics in Italy.\n\nIn American Colonial times, quilts were predominantly wholecloth quilts–a single piece of fabric layered with batting and backing held together with fine needlework quilting. Broderie perse quilts were popular during this time and the majority of pierced or appliqued quilts made during the 1170-1800 period, were medallion-style quilts (quilts with a central ornamental panel and one or more borders.)). Patchwork quilting in America dates to the 1770s, the decade the United States gained its independence from England. These late-eighteenth- and nineteenth-century patchwork quilts often mixed wool, silk, linen, and cotton in the same piece, as well as mixing large-scale (often chintz) and small-scale (often calico) patterns. Some antique quilts made in North America have worn-out blankets or older quilts as the internal batting layer, quilted between new layers of fabric and thereby extending the usefulness of old material. \n\nDuring American pioneer days, paper quilting became popular. Paper was used as a pattern and each individual piece of cut fabric was basted around the paper pattern. Paper was a scarce commodity in the early American west so women would save letters from home, newspaper clippings, and catalogs to use as patterns. The paper not only served as a pattern but as an insulator. The paper found between the old quilts has become a primary source of information about pioneer life.\n\nQuilts made without any insulation or batting were referred to as summer quilts. They were not made for warmth, only to keep the chill off during cooler summer evenings.\n\nThere is a long tradition of African-American quilting beginning with quilts made by slaves, both for themselves and for their owners. The style of these quilts was determined largely by time period and region, rather than race, and the documented slave-made quilts generally resemble those made by white women in their region. After 1865 and the end of slavery in the United States, African-Americans began to develop their own distinctive style of quilting.\nHarriet Powers, a slave-born African American woman, made two famous story quilts. She was just one of the many African-American quilters who contributed to the evolution of quilting. The first nationwide recognition of African-American quiltmaking came when the Gee's Bend quilting community was celebrated in an exhibition that opened in 2002 and travelled to many museums, including the Smithsonian. Gee's Bend is a small, isolated community of African-Americans in southern Alabama with a quiltmaking tradition that goes back several generations and is characterized by pattern improvisation, multiple patterning, bright and contrasting colors, visual motion, and a lack of rules. The contributions made by Harriet Powers and others quilters of Gee's Bend, Alabama have been recognized by the US Postal Service with a series of stamps. The \"communal\" nature of the quilting process (and how it can bring together women of varied races and backgrounds) was honored in the series of stamps.\n\nBeginning with the children's story \"Sweet Clara and the Freedom Quilt\" (1989) a legend has grown that slaves used quilts as a means to share and transmit secret messages to escape slavery and travel the Underground Railroad. Consensus among historians is that there is no sound basis for this belief, and no documented mention among the thousands of slave narratives or other contemporary records.\n\nAnother American group to develop a distinct style of quilting were the Amish. Typically, these quilts use only solid fabrics, are pieced from geometric shapes, do not contain appliqué, and construction is simple (corners are butted, rather than mitered, for instance) and done entirely by hand. Amish quilters also tend to use simple patterns: Lancaster County Amish are known for their Diamond-in-a-Square and Bars patterns, while other communities use patterns such as Brick, Streak of Lightning, Chinese Coins, and Log Cabins, and midwestern communities are known for their repeating block patterns. Borders and color choice also vary by community. For example, Lancaster quilts feature wide borders with lavish quilting, while Midwestern quilts feature narrower borders to balance the fancier piecing.\n\nSome Native Americans are thought to have learned quilting through observation of white settlers; others learned it from missionaries who taught quilting to Native American women along with other homemaking skills. Native American women quickly developed their own unique style, the Lone Star design (also called the Star of Bethlehem), a variation on Morning Star designs that had been featured on Native American clothing and other items for centuries. These quilts often featured floral appliqué framing the star design. Pictorial quilts, created with appliqué, were also common.\n\nAnother distinctive style of Native American quilting is Seminole piecing, created by Seminoles living in the Florida Everglades. The style evolved out a need for cloth (the closest town was often a week's journey away). Women would make strips of sewing the remnants of fabric rolls together, then sew these into larger pieces to make clothing. Eventually the style began to be used not just for clothing but for quilts as well. In 1900, with the introduction of sewing machines and readily available fabric in Seminole communities, the patterns became much more elaborate and the style continues to be in use today, both by Seminole women and by others who have copied and adapted their designs and techniques.\n\n\"Hawaiian quilting was well established by the beginning of the twentieth century. Hawaiian women learned to quilt from the wives of missionaries from New England in the 1820s. Though they learned both pieced work and applique, by the 1870s they had adapted applique techniques to create a uniquely Hawaiian mode of expression. The classic Hawaiian quilt design is a large, bold, curvilinear appliqué pattern that covers much of the surface of the quilt, with the symmetrical design cut from only one piece of fabric.\"\n\nThere are two primary forms of quilting that originate in South Asia: Nakshi Kantha and Ralli. Nakshi Kantha quilts originated in India and are typically made of scraps and worn-out fabric stitched together with old sari threads using kantha embroidery stitches. \"The layers of cloth were spread on the ground, held in placed with weights at the edges, and sew together with rows of large basting stitches. The cloth was then folded and worked on whenever there was time.\" The first recorded kantha are more than 500 years old.\n\nRalli quilts are traditionally made in Pakistan, western India, and the surrounding area. They are made by every sector of society including Hindu and Muslim women, women of different castes, and women from different towns or villages or tribes with the colors and designs varying among these groups. The name comes from \"ralanna\", a word meaning to mix or connect. Quilts tops were designed and pieced by one woman using scraps of hand-dyed cotton. This cotton often comes from old dresses or shawls. Once pieced, the quilt top is placed on a reed mat with the other layers and sewn together using thick, colored thread in straight parallel lines by member's of the designer's family and community.\n\nQuilting originated in Sweden in the fifteenth century with heavily stitched and appliquéd quilts made for the very wealthy. These quilts, created from silk, wool, and felt, were intended to be both decorative and functional and were found in churches and in the homes of nobility. Imported cotton first appeared in Sweden in 1870, and began to appear in Swedish quilts soon after along with scraps of wool, silk, and linen. As the availability of cotton increased and its price went down, quilting became widespread among all classes of Swedish society. Wealthier quilters used wool batting while others used linen scraps, rags, or paper mixed with animal hair. In general, these quilts were simple and narrow, made by both men and women. The biggest influence on Swedish quilting in this time period is thought to have come from America as Swedish immigrants to the United States returned to their home country when conditions there improved.\n\nDuring the late 20th century, art quilts became popular for their aesthetic and artistic qualities rather than for functionality as they are displayed on a wall or table rather than being used on a bed.. \"It is believed that decorative quilting came to Europe and Asia during the Crusades (A.D. 1100-1300), a likely idea because textile arts were more developed in China and India than in the West.\"\n\nUnusual quilting designs have increasingly become popular as decorative textiles. As industrial sewing technology has become more precise and flexible, quilting using exotic fabrics and embroidery began to appear in home furnishings in the early 21st century.\n\nThe quilt block is traditionally a patterned square of fabric that is repeated with plain blocks to form the overall design of a quilt. There are a variety of different designs for quilt blocks including the Nine-Patch, Shoo Fly, Churn Dash, and the Prairie Queen.\n\nA Nine Patch is made by sewing five patterned or dark pieces (patches) to four light square pieces in alternating order. These nine sewn squares make one block.\n\nThe Shoo Fly varies from the Nine Patch by dividing each of the four corner pieces into a light and dark triangle.\n\nAnother variation develops when one square piece is divided into two equal rectangles in the basic Nine Patch design. The Churn Dash block combines the triangles and rectangle to expand the Nine Patch.\n\nThe Prairie Queen block combines two large scale triangles in the corner section with the middle section using four squares. The center piece is one full size square. Each of the nine sections does have the same overall measurement and fits together.\n\nMany types of quilting exist today. The two most widely used are hand-quilting and machine quilting.\n\nHand quilting is the process of using a needle and thread to sew a running stitch by hand across the entire area to be quilted. This binds the layers together. A quilting frame or hoop is often used to assist in holding the piece being quilted off the quilter's lap. A quilter can make one stitch at a time by first driving the needle through the fabric from the right side, then pushing it back up through the material from the wrong side to complete the stitch; this is called a stab stitch. Another option is called a rocking stitch, where the quilter has one hand, usually with a finger wearing a thimble, on top of the quilt, while the other hand is located beneath the piece to push the needle back up. A third option is called \"loading the needle\" and involves doing four or more stitches before pulling the needle through the cloth. Hand quilting is still practiced by the Amish and Mennonites within the United States and Canada, and is enjoying a resurgence worldwide.\n\nMachine quilting is the process of using a home sewing machine or a longarm machine to sew the layers together. With the home sewing machine, the layers are tacked together before quilting. This involves laying the top, batting, and backing out on a flat surface and either pinning (using large safety pins) or tacking the layers together. Longarm quilting involves placing the layers to be quilted on a special frame. The frame has bars on which the layers are rolled, keeping these together without the need for tacking or pinning. These frames are used with a professional sewing machine mounted on a platform. The platform rides along tracks so that the machine can be moved across the layers on the frame. A longarm machine is moved across the fabric. In contrast, the fabric is moved through a home sewing machine.\n\nTying is another technique of fastening the three layers together. This is done primarily on quilts that are made to be used and are needed quickly. The process of tying the quilt is done with yarns or multiple strands of thread. Square knots are used to finish off the ties so that the quilt may be washed and used without fear of the knots coming undone. This technique is commonly called \"tacking.\" In the Midwest, tacked bed covers are referred to as comforters.\n\nQuilting is now taught in some American schools. It is also taught at senior centers around the U.S., but quilters of all ages attend classes. These forms of workshop or classes are also available in other countries in guilds and community colleges.\n\nContemporary quilters use a wide range of quilting designs and styles, from ancient and ethnic to post-modern futuristic patterns. There is no one single school or style that dominates the quilt-making world. Regardless of skill level, all quilters know the importance of having the right tools when quilting. Having the right tools increases the fluid process of making a quilt and can even be improved over time with practice. Having the right tools will maximize efficiency and make the quilting experience one to remember. Below is a list of the different tools and tips that can be used to make a quilt by hand or machine:\nA good quality sewing machine is a helpful addition to the process of piecing together a quilt top. Some also use a home sewing machine for quilting together the layers of the quilt, as well as binding the final product. It is important to understand how your particular model functions in order to select the correct settings, thread the needle and bobbin, and operate the machine. Here is a handy guide on using a machine.\nWhen making a quilt it is important to mark the fabric that you are cutting in order to have some kind of guidance when cutting the fabric, or you could use a quilting ruler and rotary cutter. When marking the fabric it is advised that you use a fabric marker, which is a marker that washes out when the quilt is washed or will fade away after repeated washes.\n\nThe longarm quilting machine makes it easier to make larger quilts because of the extended arm that is used. Being able to leverage the larger machine and not having to hold the material that is being used while quilting helps the process move along much faster and makes it easier on the quilter. Some quilt shops offer longarm services, where one can pay for their project to be quilted and in some cases, bound as well. \nWhen quilting one of the most important tools that is used is the needle. Whether you are quilting by hand or by machine, the needle that is being used is critical to the final result. Using the wrong needle can lead to puckering, bumps, or even the material being torn. There are many different styles of needles and looking at Sewing Needles will be a good guide. \nUnderstanding how pins and thimbles work is also very important in the process of making quilts. Many different combinations of pinning can be used in order get similar results and the exciting part is figuring out existing combinations as well as coming up with new ones. Thimbles are not required but are good for keeping fingers safe. \nChoosing the right types of threads for a quilt can be difficult and beginners may need some assistance from an expert or more advanced quilter. The color, composition, and type of thread that is used will have a pivotal role in the outcome of the final quilt. \nWhat a quilter uses to cut the fabric is a vital step in the quilting process. It is very important each piece is perfectly aligned in order to prevent an uneven or sloppy appearance and to prevent rework. Rotary cutters revolutionized quiltmaking when they appeared in late 1970s. A rotary cutter offers even the shakiest of hands the ability to produce perfect, even slices and minimizes the chance of error.\nQuilts can have many different templates or patterns and they can have a large impact on the final result. There are a number of mediums that can be used and depending on the usage, size, and style they will give your quilt a varied look. Templates are generally considered the basis of the structure of the quilt, like a blueprint for a house. If used properly it can help quilters produce a quilt of their liking and give them a sense of satisfaction and vision for future quilts they want to make.\n\nThis section describes basic information about the assembly of quilts using machine quilting techniques. Many cultures and groups in different parts of the world have their own unique approaches, methods and styles of quilting which are not addressed below.\n\nThe top-most layer of a quilt is usually made from cotton quilting fabric. Selecting the fabric can be a challenging exercise, and the number of different fabrics required depends on the quilting pattern selected. Many quilters will also make use of fabrics from home, incorporating fabrics with a particular sentimental importance.\n\nNewly bought fabric is often washed before being cut or sewn. If not pre-washed, there is a risk of the fabric dyes bleeding during later washing. Many fabric manufacturers take this into account and have taken steps to prevent color-bleeding. Washing, and subsequently drying, the fabric will also shrink some fabrics, so it is best to do this before cutting the fabric into the shapes and sizes needed. The fabric must be ironed flat before cutting to prevent creases or wrinkles from altering measurements.\nWith large-scale projects like quilts, it is often advantageous to have a rotary cutter and mat. A rotary cutter is a cutting tool with a round blade, making it easy to cut a smooth, continuous line. Rotary cutters come with different sized blades: a larger blade is useful for large projects with straight lines, while a smaller blade is helpful for small areas or curved lines. A rotary mat protects tables and surfaces from the blade, while also protecting the cutting edge from damage. A quilting ruler can also be used, to help ensure that all pieces are cut to consistent sizes. Quilting rulers are made of clear plastic and have marked grid-lines across the surface of the ruler. This type of ruler makes it possible to cut a piece of fabric in the correct width or length without having to use a measuring tape and fabric chalk. Measurements have to include a seam allowance.\n\nOnce the fabrics have been cut, the pieces are sewn together in the chosen pattern. This can be done by hand or by machine. Accurate seam allowances are especially important when it comes to quilting. With dozens, sometimes hundreds, of different seams, if each seam is off by even 0.5 cm it becomes difficult to make all of the components fit together evenly.\n\nThere are generally three layers in a quilt: the quilt top, the middle layer of batting, and the fabric backing. The quilt top is the design layer. The cotton or polyester batting in the middle layer is what determines the warmth of the quilt. Batting comes in different thicknesses depending on the purpose of the final quilt, and multiple layers of batting can be combined to increase the warmth of the final product. The bottom layer is often a simple layer of solid fabric, in a neutral or complimentary color and design scheme, though some quilters use the extra or spare fabric from the quilt top to make a secondary design for the backing.\n\nBefore actually quilting fabrics, some quilters baste the quilt. Basting is the practice of making long, loose stitches in a grid format across the surface of the quilt to hold the layers of the quilt together and to prevent them from shifting during the quilting process. Basting can also be done using large curved safety pins rather than machine or hand basting.\n\nThe layers of the quilt are then stitched together, either by hand or through the use of a sewing machine or longarm. One method of quilting involves the use of an outline or stencil applied to the surface of the quilt using fabric chalk, washable marker or iron-on pattern. The quilter will then sew along the applied pattern, washing or wiping the stencil off after the quilt is complete. Some quilters choose not to make use of a pattern. Free-motion quilting is the process of quilting without the use of a stencil or other guide, requiring a steady hand and a great deal of practice. Quilting is usually completed by starting from the middle, and moving outward toward the edges of the quilt. Quilting can be elaborately decorative, comprising stitching fashioned into complex designs and patterns, simple or complex geometric grids, \"motifs\" traced from published quilting patterns or traced pictures, freehand, or complex repeated designs called tessellations. The quilter may choose to emphasize these designs by using threads that are multicolored or metallic, or that contrast highly to the fabric. Conversely, the quilter may choose to make the quilting disappear, using \"invisible\" nylon or polyester thread, thread that matches the quilt top, or stitching within the patchwork seams themselves (commonly known as \"stitch in the ditch\").\nOnce the layers have been quilted, the edges must be finished and bound. There are many different ways to bind a quilt. One of the simplest involves sewing one side of a strip of fabric to the front side of the quilt, through all of the layers of fabric, then folding the strip over to the back side of the fabric and hand stitching the binding closed.\n\nIf the quilt will be hung on the wall, there is an additional step: making and attaching the hanging sleeve.\n\nThroughout China, a simple method of producing quilts is employed. It involves setting up a temporary roadside site. A frame is assembled within which a lattice work of cotton thread is made. Cotton batting, either new or retrieved from discarded quilts, is prepared in a mobile carding machine. The mechanism of the carding machine is powered by a small, petrol motor. The batting is then added, layer by layer, to the area within the frame. Between each layer, a new lattice of thread is created with a wooden disk used to tamp down the layer.\n\n\n\nQuilting is often combined with embroidery, patchwork, applique, and other forms of needlework.\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "25204", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25204", "title": "Qt (software)", "text": "Qt (software)\n\nQt ( \"cute\") is a cross-platform application framework that is used for developing application software that can be run on various software and hardware platforms with little or no change in the underlying codebase, while still being a native application with native capabilities and speed. Qt is currently being developed both by The Qt Company, a company listed on the Nasdaq Helsinki Stock Exchange, and the Qt Project under open-source governance, involving individual developers and firms working to advance Qt. Qt is available with both proprietary and open source GPL 2.0, GPL 3.0, and LGPL 3.0 licenses.\n\nQt is used for developing multi-platform applications and graphical user interfaces (GUIs); however, programs without a GUI can be developed, such as command-line tools and consoles for servers. An example of a non-GUI program using Qt is the Cutelyst web framework. GUI programs created with Qt can have a native-looking interface, in which case Qt is classified as a \"widget toolkit\".\n\nIt has extensive internationalization support. Non-GUI features include SQL database access, XML parsing, JSON parsing, thread management and network support.\n\nQt uses standard C++ with extensions including signals and slots that simplify handling of events, and this helps in development of both GUI and server applications which receive their own set of event information and should process them accordingly. Qt supports many compilers, including the GCC C++ compiler and the Visual Studio suite. Qt also provides Qt Quick, that includes a declarative scripting language called QML that allows using JavaScript to provide the logic. With Qt Quick, rapid application development for mobile devices became possible, although logic can be written with native code as well to achieve the best possible performance.\n\nQt can be used in several other programming languages via language bindings. It runs on the major desktop platforms and some of the mobile platforms.\n\nIn 2017, the Qt Company estimates a community of approximately 1 million developers worldwide in over 70 industries.\n\nThere are several benefits for using Qt, such as Qt being a cross-platform toolkit, that has led it to be adopted by a wide range of companies and organizations such as European Space Agency, DreamWorks, Lucasfilm, Panasonic, Philips, Samsung, Siemens, Volvo, Walt Disney Animation Studios, Blizzard Entertainment, Electronic Arts, AMD, and Valve Corporation.\n\nSeveral GUIs and desktop environments utilize Qt as widget toolkit:\n\n\nNotable applications using Qt or QML are: \n\nThere are cases where famous applications have ported their entire code base from another toolkit to Qt to enjoy the benefit of having a cross-platform native GUI, such as the Wireshark network packet analyzer, LXQt desktop, VLC media player and the Rosegarden audio editor.\nThere are four editions of Qt available: \"Community\", \"Indie Mobile\", \"Professional\" and \"Enterprise\". The Community version is under the open source licenses, while the Indie Mobile, Professional and Enterprise versions, which contain additional functionality and libraries, e.g. Charts and Data Visualization, Enterprise Controls, and Virtual Keyboard are commercially sold by The Qt Company.\n\nQt is available under the following free software licenses: GPL 3.0, LGPL 3.0 and LGPL 2.1 (with Qt special exception). Note that some modules are only available under a GPL license, which means that applications which statically link to these modules need to comply with that license.\n\nIn addition, Qt has always been available under a commercial license, like the Qt Commercial License, that allows developing proprietary applications with no restrictions on licensing.\n\nQt, when it was first released, relied on a few key concepts:\n\nQt comes with its own set of tools to ease cross-platform development, which can otherwise be cumbersome due to different set of development tools. Qt Creator is a cross-platform IDE for C++ and QML. Qt Designer's GUI layout/design functionality is integrated into the IDE, although Qt Designer can still be started as a standalone tool.\n\nIn addition to Qt Creator, Qt provides qmake, a cross-platform build script generation tool that automates the generation of Makefiles for development projects across different platforms. Without such a tool, one would have to write different Makefiles for each platform, so it is useful for abstracting away the differences of various platforms.\n\nThere are other tools available in Qt, including the Qt Designer interface builder and the Qt Assistant help browser (which are both embedded in Qt Creator), the Qt Linguist translation tool, uic (user interface compiler), and moc (Meta-Object Compiler).\n\nQt works on many different platforms; the following are officially supported:\n\nAfter Nokia opened the Qt source code to the community on Gitorious various ports appeared. There are also some ports of Qt that may be available, but are not supported anymore. These platforms are listed in List of platforms supported by Qt.\n\nStarting with Qt 4.0 the framework was split into individual modules. With Qt 5.0 the architecture was modularized even further. Qt is now split into \"essential\" and \"add-on\" modules.\n\nThe latest version of Qt is 5.9 LTS which is released on 31 May 2017, and is supported for 3 years until 31 May 2020. The next planned version of Qt will be Qt 5.10, which is planned to be released on 30 November 2017 with several new features including initial Vulkan support for Windows, Linux and Android.\n\nIn the summer of 1990, Haavard Nord and Eirik Chambe-Eng (the original developers of Qt and the CEO and President, respectively, of Trolltech) were working together on a database application for ultrasound images written in C++ and running on Mac OS, Unix, and Windows. They began development of \"Qt\" in 1991, three years before the company was incorporated as Quasar Technologies, then changed the name to Troll Tech and then to Trolltech.\n\nThe toolkit was called Qt because the letter Q looked appealing in Haavard's Emacs typeface, and \"t\" was inspired by Xt, the X toolkit.\n\nThe first two versions of Qt had only two flavors: Qt/X11 for Unix and Qt/Windows for Windows.\n\nOn 20 May 1995 Troll Tech publicly released Qt 0.90 for X11/Linux with the source code under the \"Qt Free Edition License\". This license was viewed as not compliant with the open source principle by the Open Source Initiative and the free software definition by Free Software Foundation because, while the source was available, it did not allow the redistribution of modified versions. Trolltech used this license until version 1.45. Controversy erupted around 1998 when it became clear that the K Desktop Environment was going to become one of the leading desktop environments for Linux. As it was based on Qt, many people in the free software movement worried that an essential piece of one of their major operating systems would be proprietary.\n\nThe Windows platform was only available under a proprietary license, which meant free/open source applications written in Qt for X11 could not be ported to Windows without purchasing the proprietary edition.\n\nWith the release of version 2.0 of the toolkit, the license was changed to the Q Public License (QPL), a free software license, but one regarded by the Free Software Foundation as incompatible with the GPL. Compromises were sought between KDE and Trolltech whereby Qt would not be able to fall under a more restrictive license than the QPL, even if Trolltech was bought out or went bankrupt. This led to the creation of the KDE Free Qt foundation, which guarantees that Qt would fall under a BSD-style license should no free/open source version of Qt be released during 12 months.\n\nIn 2000, Qt/X11 2.2 was released under the GPL v2, ending all controversy regarding GPL compatibility.\n\nAt the end of 2001, Trolltech released Qt 3.0, which added support for Mac OS X. The Mac OS X support was available only in the proprietary license until June 2003, when Trolltech released Qt 3.2 with Mac OS X support available under the GPL.\n\nIn 2002, members of the KDE on Cygwin project began porting the GPL licensed Qt/X11 code base to Windows. This was in response to Trolltech's refusal to license Qt/Windows under the GPL on the grounds that Windows was not a free/open source software platform. The project achieved reasonable success although it never reached production quality.\n\nThis was resolved when Trolltech released Qt 4.0 also for Windows under the GPL in June 2005. Qt 4 supported the same set of platforms in the free software/open source editions as in the proprietary edition, so it is possible, with Qt 4.0 and later releases, to create GPL-licensed free/open source applications using Qt on all supported platforms. The GPL v3 with special exception was later added as an added licensing option. The GPL exception allows the final application to be licensed under various GPL-incompatible free software/open source licenses such as the Mozilla Public License 1.1.\n\nNokia acquired Trolltech ASA on 17 June 2008 and changed the name first to Qt Software, then to Qt Development Frameworks.\n\nSince then it focused on Qt development to turn it into the main development platform for its devices, including a port to the Symbian S60 platform. Version 1.0 of the Nokia Qt SDK was released on 23 June 2010. The source code was made available over Gitorious, a community oriented git source code repository, to gather an even broader community that is not only using Qt but also helping to improve it.\n\nOn 14 January 2009, Qt version 4.5 added another option, the LGPL, which should make Qt even more attractive for non-GPL open source projects and for closed applications.\n\nIn February 2011, Nokia announced its decision to drop Symbian technologies and base their future smartphones on the Windows Phone platform instead. One month later, Nokia announced the sale of Qt's commercial licensing and professional services to Digia, with the immediate goal of taking Qt support to Android, iOS and Windows 8 platforms, and to continue focusing on desktop and embedded development, although Nokia was to remain the main development force behind the framework at that time.\n\nIn March 2011, Nokia sold the commercial licensing part of Qt to Digia creating Qt Commercial. In August 2012, Digia announced that it would acquire Qt from Nokia. The Qt team at Digia started their work in September 2012. They released Qt 5.0 within a month and newer versions every 6 months with new features and additional supported platforms.\n\nIn September 2014, Digia transferred the Qt business and copyrights to their wholly owned subsidiary, The Qt Company, which owns 25 brands related to Qt. In May 2016, Digia and Qt demerged completely into two independent companies.\n\nQt 5 was officially released on 19 December 2012. This new version marked a major change in the platform, with hardware-accelerated graphics, QML and JavaScript playing a major role. The traditional C++-only QWidgets continued to be supported, but did not benefit from the performance improvements available through the new architecture. Qt 5 brings significant improvements to the speed and ease of developing user interfaces.\n\nFramework development of Qt 5 moved to open governance, taking place at qt-project.org. There it is now possible for developers outside Digia to submit patches and have them reviewed.\n\n\nQt Wiki provides a comprehensive list of English books about Qt. This is a list of notable books:\n"}
{"id": "25207", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25207", "title": "QuakeC", "text": "QuakeC\n\nQuakeC is an interpreted language developed in 1996 by John Carmack of id Software to program parts of the video game \"Quake\". Using QuakeC, a programmer is able to customize \"Quake\" to great extents by adding weapons, changing game logic and physics, and programming complex scenarios. It can be used to control many aspects of the game itself, such as parts of the AI, triggers, or changes in the level. The \"Quake\" engine was the only game engine to use QuakeC. Following engines used DLL game modules for customization written in C and C++ from id Tech 4 on.\n\nThe QuakeC source to the original id Software \"Quake\" game logic was published in 1996 and used as the basis for modifications like capture the flag and others. QuakeC source code is compiled using a tool called qcc into a bytecode kept in a file called progs.dat. The programmers of \"Quake\" modifications could then publish their progs.dat bytecode without revealing their source code. Most \"Quake\" mods were published this way.\n\nQuakeC allowed the \"Quake\" engine to dominate the direction of the first-person shooter genre. Thanks to Carmack's idea of extending video game life by adding unlimited expandability (extensibility already played a big role in \"Doom\"), an enormous Internet community of gamers and programmers alike has arisen and many modern multiplayer games are extensible in some form.\n\nQuakeC is known as interpreted because as \"Quake\" runs, it is continually interpreting the progs.dat file.\n\nThe syntax of QuakeC is based on that of the C programming language, explaining its name, but it does not support the implementation of new types, structures, arrays, or any kind of referencing other than the \"entity\" type (which is always a reference). QuakeC also suffers from the fact that many built-in functions (functions prototyped in the QuakeC code but actually defined within the game engine and written in C) return strings in a temporary string buffer, which can only hold one string at any given time. In other words, a construct such as\n\nwill fail because the second call to codice_2 (which converts a floating-point value to a string) overwrites the string returned by the first call before SomeFunction can do something with it. QuakeC does not contain any string handling functions or file handling functions, which were simply not needed by the original game.\n\nMost video games at the time had their game logic written in plain C/C++ and compiled into the executable, which is faster. However, this makes it harder for the community to create mods and it makes the process of porting the game to another platform (such as GNU/Linux) more costly.\n\nDespite its advantages, the concept of implementing the game logic in a separate scripting language and writing an interpreter for it was soon dropped (even by John Carmack who had implemented this concept) because of the overall inflexibility of an interpreted language, the increasingly complex game logic and the fact that the game logic could be packaged into a native dynamic link library whose source code could be released to the mod community.\n\nAs is their custom to do with nearly everything they make, id Software released the source of codice_3, their QuakeC compiler, along with the original QuakeC code in 1996. Modified versions soon sprung up, including Jonathan Roy's codice_4 and Ryan \"FrikaC\" Smith's FrikQCC. These added functionality, optimizations, and compiling speed boosts.\n\nIn 1999, when id Software released the code from Quake's engine under the GNU General Public License (GPL), the workings of the bytecode interpreter were examined and new QuakeC compilers were released, such as J.P. Grossman's codice_5 and a new version of FrikQCC. These compilers took advantage of newly discovered features in a backwards-compatible way so that the bytecode could still be properly interpreted by unmodified Quake engines. New features include arrays, pointers, integers, for loops and string manipulation.\n\nWith the \"Quake\" engine source code now able to be changed, further features were added to QuakeC in the form of new built-in functions. Features long yearned for by QuakeC coders finally reached realization as QuakeC now had file and string handling functions, enlarged string buffers, more math functions, and so on. However, programmers taking advantage of these changes lost backwards compatibility with the unmodified Quake engine.\n\n\"Xonotic\" since version 0.7 uses the gmqcc compiler.\n\nSome enhanced Quake engines (notably Darkplaces and FTEQW) have support for an extension of regular QuakeC (now commonly referred to as Server Side QuakeC or SSQC) that allows client side only scripting of the Quake engine. This is especially useful for GUIs, HUDs and any visually heavy effects that do not need to be simulated on the server and transferred over the network.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "25208", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25208", "title": "Quad Cities", "text": "Quad Cities\n\nThe Quad Cities is a region of four counties in northwest Illinois and Southeastern Iowa. The urban core consists of five principal cities: Davenport and Bettendorf in Iowa, and Rock Island, Moline and East Moline in Illinois. These cities are the center of the Quad Cities Metropolitan Area, which as of 2013 had a population estimate of 383,781 and a CSA (Combined Statistical Area) population of 474,937, making it the 90th largest CSA in the nation.\n\nBefore European settlers came to inhabit the Quad Cities, the confluence of rivers had attracted many varying cultures of indigenous peoples, who used the waterways and riverbanks for their settlements for thousands of years. At the time of European encounter, it was a home and principal trading place of the Sauk and Fox tribes of Native Americans. \"Saukenuk\" was the principal village of the Sauk tribe and birthplace of its 19th-century war chief, Black Hawk. In 1832, Sauk chief \"Keokuk\" and General Winfield Scott signed a treaty in Davenport after the US defeated the Sauk and their allies in the Black Hawk War. The treaty resulted in the Native Americans ceding six million acres (24,000 km²) of land to the United States in exchange for a much smaller reservation elsewhere. Black Hawk State Historic Site in Rock Island preserves part of historic Saukenuk and is listed on the National Register of Historic Places.\n\nThe history of urban settlements in the Quad Cities was stimulated by riverboat traffic. For 14 miles (21 km) between LeClaire, Iowa, and Rock Island, the Mississippi River flowed across a series of finger-like rock projections protruding from either bank. These rapids were difficult for steamboats to traverse. As demand for river-based transportation increased along the upper Mississippi, the navigability of the river throughout the \"Rock Island Rapids\" became a greater concern. Over time, a minor industry grew up in the area to meet the steamboats' needs. Boat crews needed rest areas to stop before encountering the rapids, places to hire expert pilots such as Phillip Suiter, who was the first licensed pilot on the upper Mississippi River, to guide the boat through the rocky waters, or, when the water was low, places where goods could be removed and transported by wagon on land past the rapids. Today, the rocks are submerged six feet underwater by a lake formed by two locks and dams.\n\nAs the Industrial Revolution developed in the United States, many enterprising industrialists looked to the Mississippi River as a promising source of water power. The combination of energy and easy access to river transportation attracted entrepreneurs and industrialists to the Quad Cities for development. In 1848, John Deere moved his plough business to Moline. His business was incorporated as Deere & Company in 1868. Deere & Company is the largest employer today in the Quad Cities.\n\nThe first railroad bridge built across the Mississippi River connected Davenport and Rock Island in 1856. It was built by the Rock Island Railroad Company, and replaced the slow seasonal ferry service and winter ice bridges as the primary modes of transportation across the river. Steamboaters saw the nationwide railroads as a threat to their business. On May 6, 1856, just weeks after completion of the bridge, an angry steamboater crashed the \"Effie Afton\" into it. John Hurd, the owner of the \"Effie Afton\", filed a lawsuit against the Rock Island Railroad Company. The Rock Island Railroad Company selected Abraham Lincoln as their trial lawyer and won after he took the case to the US Supreme Court. Phillip Suiter was one of his expert witnesses. It was a pivotal trial in Lincoln's career.\n\nAfter the civil war, the region began to gain a common identity. The river towns that were thoughtfully planned and competently led flourished, while other settlements, usually get-rich-quick schemes for speculators, failed to pan out. By World War I, the towns of Davenport, Rock Island, and Moline had begun to style themselves as the \"Tri-Cities\", a cluster of three more-or-less equally sized river communities growing around the small bend of the Mississippi River where it flows west. But with the growth of Rock Island County, during the 1930s the term \"Quad Cities\" came into vogue, as East Moline was given \"equal status\". Despite the fact that the region had earned the name \"Quad Cities\", the National Basketball Association had a franchise in Moline, Illinois, from 1946 to 1951 called the \"Tri-Cities Blackhawks\". Then, with the opening of an Alcoa (now Arconic) plant east of Davenport in 1948, the town of Bettendorf underwent so much growth that many people in the community discussed the adoption of the name \"Quint Cities\", and indeed, eventually Bettendorf passed East Moline in size. But by this time, the name \"Quad Cities\" had become known well beyond the area, and \"Quint Cities\" never caught on, despite the efforts of WOC-TV (as KWQC-TV was then called) and others.\n\nBeginning in the late 1970s, economic conditions caused major industrial restructuring, which disrupted the basis of the region's economy. The major companies, agricultural manufacturers, ceased or scaled back operations in the Quad Cities. Factories which closed included International Harvester in Rock Island and Case IH in Bettendorf. Moline-based John Deere cut its labor headcount by one half. Later in the 1980s, Caterpillar Inc. closed its factories at Mount Joy and Bettendorf.\n\nSince the 1990s, the Quad Cities governments, businesses, non-profits and residents have worked hard to redevelop the region. They have achieved national attention for their accomplishments.\n\nExamples of revitalization and rebirth include:\n\nThe Quad Cities are located at the confluence of the Rock and Mississippi rivers, approximately west of Chicago, and form the largest metropolitan area along the Mississippi River between Minneapolis–Saint Paul and the St. Louis metropolitan area. Interstate 80 crosses the Mississippi River here. The Quad Cities area is distinctive because the Mississippi River flows from east to west as it passes through the heart of the area; the Iowa cities of Davenport and Bettendorf are located due north of Rock Island and Moline, respectively.\n\nThe Quad Cities area is one where the telephone companies cooperate with regional phone calls. Iowa and Illinois have different area codes (563 and 309 respectively), yet most calls originating and terminating within the core urban area are placed without long-distance charges by dialing just a 7-digit number. This helps the bi-state area promote itself as a single community, \"joined by a river.\"\n\nThe Quad Cities Metropolitan Area consists of three counties: Scott County in Iowa, and Rock Island County and Henry County in Illinois. The Quad City metro population is 382,268. The Quad Cities Metropolitan Area is also considered part of the Great Lakes Megalopolis.\n\nAccording to the 2010 United States Census estimate, the metropolitan area grew to 379,690. As of the 2000 census, a total of 96,495 households and 605,35 families resided in the area.\n\nThe racial makeup of the area are 90.6% White (410,861), 3.7% Black or African American (27,757), 0.6% American Indian and Alaskan Native (1,255), 1.0% Asian (6,624), 0.0% Pacific Islander (156), and 2.0% from two or more races (11,929). 7.1% of the population is Hispanic or Latino of any race (37,070). Other Ethnicities include mainly of that of European such as German, Irish, and English, as well Scandinavian (Mostly Swedish) and Dutch. The main Minorities are mainly African Americans, which in Davenport are the third largest black population in the state of Iowa, as-well consisting a large population of Vietnamese people in the city, although the largest Asian population in all 5 cities are the Asian Indians\n\n\n\nAccording to Quad Cities website, the top employers in the Quad Cities area are:\n\n\"Alphabetical by first name\"\n\n\nSince 1916, the region has supported the Quad City Symphony Orchestra, which presents a year-round schedule of concerts at the Adler Theatre in Davenport and Centennial Hall in Rock Island. The Handel Oratorio Society, dating to 1880, is the second-oldest organization of its kind in the nation and presents annual performances of \"Messiah\" along with another major work for choir and orchestra. The Augustana Choir, founded at Rock Island's Augustana College in 1934, is one of the nation's leading collegiate choruses. Major outdoor summer music festivals include the Bix Beiderbecke Memorial Jazz Festival, Mississippi Valley Blues Festival, and River Roots Live.\n\nThe Quad Cities' three traditional community theaters – Playcrafters Barn Theatre (founded in 1920, comedies and dramas) and Quad City Music Guild (1948, musicals) in Moline, and Genesius guild (1957, outdoor Shakespeare and Greek comedies and tragedies) in Rock Island – were joined in 1976 by Circa '21 Dinner Playhouse, a professional dinner theater in downtown Rock Island's historic Fort Theatre. Ballet is performed at Ballet Quad Cities. The River Music Experience provides quality music programming, education, and outreach to all cities.ComedySportz provides improv comedy. Bluebox Limited is a Bettendorf-based film production company, and many outside productions companies have filmed movies in the Quad Cities in recent years. Historic buildings and sites listed on state and the National Register of Historic Places interpret the history of people's settlement and lives in the area.\n\nBill McAlister recorded a song titled \"Quad City Queen\" and included it on his \"Illinois Opry\" album. The song references the TPC golf course in Silvis, and the arsenal gate.\n\nThe Quad Cities is the 151st largest radio market in the United States. It is ranked 97th by Nielsen Media Research for the 2008–09 television season with 309,600 television households.\n\nThe area is served by over 13 commercial radio stations, 8 non-commercial radio stations, 3 low power FM radio stations, 8 TV stations and 3 daily newspapers.\n\nIn 2012, the Mississippi Valley Fair that is held in Davenport served as the film location for Rodney Atkins' music video \"Just Wanna Rock N' Roll.\"\n\nAlso in 2012, the PBS Frontline documentary \"Poor Kids\" was filmed in and around the Quad Cities showing poverty from a child's perspective.\n\nFour interstate highways serve the Quad Cities: Interstate 80, Interstate 280, Interstate 74 serve both states while Interstate 88 serves just Illinois. United States highways include U.S. Route 6 and U.S. Route 67 which run through both Iowa and Illinois, while U.S. Route 61 serves just Iowa and U.S. Route 150 serves just Illinois.\n\nA total of five bridges accessible by automobiles connect Iowa with Illinois in the Quad Cities across the Mississippi River. The Fred Schwengel Memorial Bridge carries Interstate 80 and connects Le Claire, Iowa, with Rapids City, Illinois. Continuing downstream, the I-74 Bridge connects Bettendorf, Iowa, with Moline, Illinois, and is the busiest bridge with an average of 70,400 cars a day. The Government Bridge connects Downtown Davenport with the Rock Island Arsenal. Three bridges connect Davenport with Rock Island, Illinois; The Rock Island Centennial Bridge, The Crescent Rail Bridge, and the furthest downstream bridge, the Sergeant John F. Baker, Jr. Bridge which carries I-280.\n\nSeveral state highways also serve the area. Iowa Highway 22 is on Davenport's southwest side and runs west through the county, while Iowa Highway 130 runs along Northwest Boulevard on Davenport's north edge. Illinois Route 5 (John Deere Road) runs from Rock Island east till it runs into Interstate 88. Illinois Route 92 runs along the Mississippi River, while Illinois Route 84 runs along the east side of Rock Island County. Illinois Route 192 connects Highway 92 with Illinois Route 94 near Taylor Ridge. The Chicago – Kansas City Expressway also serves the area along Interstates 74, 80, and 88.\n\nThere are three transit operators in the Quad Cities with limited interconnection between them. Rock Island County Metropolitan Mass Transit District (Quad Cities MetroLINK) serves the Illinois cities of Rock Island, Moline, East Moline, Milan, Silvis, Carbon Cliff, Hampton and Colona. It has 12 routes and a fleet of about 52 buses. It operates a river craft during summer months. In Iowa, Davenport Citibus has 13 fixed routes and operates 20 buses, six days a week and Bettendorf Transit operates five routes, Monday–Saturday, and has eight buses.\n\nAmtrak currently does not serve the Quad Cities. The closest station is about away in Galesburg, Illinois. In 2008, the two current United States Senators from Iowa, Tom Harkin and Chuck Grassley, Illinois Senator Dick Durbin, and former President Barack Obama sent a letter to Amtrak asking them to begin plans to bring rail service to the Quad Cities. In October 2010, a $230 million federal fund was announced that will bring Amtrak service to the Quad Cities, with a new line running from Moline to Chicago. They hope to have the line completed in 2015, and offer two round trips daily to Chicago. In December 2011, the federal government awarded $177 million in funding for the Amtrak connection. It will establish passenger rail for the first time since the 1970s.\n\nThe Quad Cities are served by the Quad City International Airport, Illinois' third-busiest airport, located in Moline. The airport is marketed as a regional alternative to the larger airports in Chicago, nearly away. The smaller Davenport Municipal Airport is the home of the Quad City Air Show.\n\nFrom 1907 to 1926, Rock Island was home to the NFL's Rock Island Independents. The franchise was a charter member on the National Football League (NFL) in 1920. The first NFL Game ever was played by the Islanders at Douglas Park in September, 1920. Football legend Jim Thorpe was a member of the team in 1924.\n\nThe Tri-Cities Blackhawks, named in honor of the Sauk war chief Black Hawk, was the next top-level professional sports franchise. The club played in the National Basketball League (NBL) from 1946 until its merger in 1949 with the Basketball Association of America to become the National Basketball Association (NBA). Hall of famer Red Auerbach coached the Blackhawks during their first NBA season.\n\nAfter the 1950–51 basketball season, the team moved to Milwaukee, where they were named the Hawks. After a second move to St. Louis, the team is now the Atlanta Hawks.\n\nProfessional basketball returned to the Quad Cities during the 1980s and 1990s with the Quad City Thunder of the Continental Basketball Association. The CBA served as the NBA's premiere developmental league and produced many highly regarded NBA stars. From 1987 through the 1992–93 season, the Thunder played at Wharton Field House in Moline. Starting with the 1993–94 season, the team played at The MARK of the Quad Cities (now the iWireless Center.) After the CBA folded in 2001, the Thunder franchise ceased operations permanently.\n\nThe Quad Cities has hosted minor league baseball teams since the Davenport Brown Stockings first played in 1878. The Rock Island Islanders and Moline Plowboys each fielded teams for many seasons. The Islanders began play in 1901and played primarily at Douglas Park. The Plowboys were founded in 1914. Their home was Browning Field.\n\nThe Davenport franchise has been a member of the Midwest League since 1960. They have played at Modern Woodman Park since 1931. Today, the Quad Cities River Bandits are a Class A affiliate of the Houston Astros.\n\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "25211", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25211", "title": "Quantum chemistry", "text": "Quantum chemistry\n\nQuantum chemistry is a branch of chemistry whose primary focus is the application of quantum mechanics in physical models and experiments of chemical systems. It is also called molecular quantum mechanics.\n\nIt involves heavy interplay of experimental and theoretical methods:\n\n\nIn these ways, quantum chemists investigate chemical phenomena.\n\n\nSome view the birth of quantum chemistry as starting with the discovery of the Schrödinger equation and its application to the hydrogen atom in 1926. However, the 1927 article of Walter Heitler and Fritz London is often recognized as the first milestone in the history of quantum chemistry. This is the first application of quantum mechanics to the diatomic hydrogen molecule, and thus to the phenomenon of the chemical bond. In the following years much progress was accomplished by Edward Teller, Robert S. Mulliken, Max Born, J. Robert Oppenheimer, Linus Pauling, Erich Hückel, Douglas Hartree, Vladimir Aleksandrovich Fock, to cite a few. The history of quantum chemistry also goes through the 1838 discovery of cathode rays by Michael Faraday, the 1859 statement of the black body radiation problem by Gustav Kirchhoff, the 1877 suggestion by Ludwig Boltzmann that the energy states of a physical system could be discrete, and the 1900 quantum hypothesis by Max Planck that any energy radiating atomic system can theoretically be divided into a number of discrete energy elements \"ε\" such that each of these energy elements is proportional to the frequency \"ν\" with which they each individually radiate energy and a numerical value called Planck’s Constant. Then, in 1905, to explain the photoelectric effect (1839), i.e., that shining light on certain materials can function to eject electrons from the material, Albert Einstein postulated, based on Planck’s quantum hypothesis, that light itself consists of individual quantum particles, which later came to be called photons (1926). In the years to follow, this theoretical basis slowly began to be applied to chemical structure, reactivity, and bonding. Probably the greatest contribution to the field was made by Linus Pauling.\n\nThe first step in solving a quantum chemical problem is usually solving the Schrödinger equation (or Dirac equation in relativistic quantum chemistry) with the electronic molecular Hamiltonian. This is called determining the electronic structure of the molecule. It can be said that the electronic structure of a molecule or crystal implies essentially its chemical properties. An exact solution for the Schrödinger equation can only be obtained for the hydrogen atom (though exact solutions for the bound state energies of the hydrogen molecular ion have been identified in terms of the generalized Lambert W function). Since all other atomic, or molecular systems, involve the motions of three or more \"particles\", their Schrödinger equations cannot be solved exactly and so approximate solutions must be sought.\n\nThe foundation of quantum mechanics and quantum chemistry is the wave model, in which the atom is a small, dense, positively charged nucleus surrounded by electrons. The wave model is derived from the wavefunction, a set of possible equations derived from the time evolution of the Schrödinger equation which is applied to the wavelike probability distribution of subatomic particles. Unlike the earlier Bohr model of the atom, however, the wave model describes electrons as \"clouds\" moving in orbitals, and their positions are represented by probability distributions rather than discrete points. The strength of this model lies in its predictive power. Specifically, it predicts the pattern of chemically similar elements found in the periodic table. The wave model is so named because electrons exhibit properties (such as interference) traditionally associated with waves. See wave-particle duality. In this model, when we solve the Schrödinger Equation for an Hidrogenoid Atom, we obtain a solution that depends on some numbers, called quantum numbers, that describes the orbital, the most probable space where an electron can be. These are n, the principal quantum number, for the energy, l, or secondary quantum number, which correlates to the angular momentum, ml, for the orientation, and ms the spin. This model can explain the new lines that appeared in the spectroscopy of atoms. For multielectron atoms we must introduce some rules as that the electrons fill orbitals in a way to minimize the energy of the atom, in order of increasing energy, the Pauli Exclusion Principle, the Hund's Rule, and the Aufbau Principle.\n\nAlthough the mathematical basis of quantum chemistry had been laid by Schrödinger in 1926, it is generally accepted that the first true calculation in quantum chemistry was that of the German physicists Walter Heitler and Fritz London on the hydrogen (H) molecule in 1927. Heitler and London's method was extended by the American theoretical physicist John C. Slater and the American theoretical chemist Linus Pauling to become the Valence-Bond (VB) [or Heitler–London–Slater–Pauling (HLSP)] method. In this method, attention is primarily devoted to the pairwise interactions between atoms, and this method therefore correlates closely with classical chemists' drawings of bonds. It focuses on how the atomic orbitals of an atom combine to give individual chemical bonds when a molecule is formed. The concept of chemical bond distorts when the aromatic compounds are considered, then you need to apply resonance ideas and hybridization that doesn´t correspond to chemical view of fixed shared pair of electrons between molecules (see Aromaticity).\n\nAn alternative approach was developed in 1929 by Friedrich Hund and Robert S. Mulliken, in which electrons are described by mathematical functions delocalized over an entire molecule. The Hund–Mulliken approach or molecular orbital (MO) method is less intuitive to chemists, but has turned out capable of predicting spectroscopic properties better than the VB method. This approach is the conceptional basis of the Hartree–Fock method and further post Hartree–Fock methods.\n\nThe Thomas–Fermi model was developed independently by Thomas and Fermi in 1927. This was the first attempt to describe many-electron systems on the basis of electronic density instead of wave functions, although it was not very successful in the treatment of entire molecules. The method did provide the basis for what is now known as density functional theory. Modern day DFT uses the Kohn-Sham method, where the density functional is split into four terms; the Kohn-Sham kinetic energy, an external potential, exchange and correlation energies. A large part of the focus on developing DFT is on improving the exchange and correlation terms. Though this method is less developed than post Hartree–Fock methods, its significantly lower computational requirements (scaling typically no worse than formula_1 with respect to formula_2 basis functions, for the pure functionals) allow it to tackle larger polyatomic molecules and even macromolecules. This computational affordability and often comparable accuracy to MP2 and CCSD(T) (post-Hartree–Fock methods) has made it one of the most popular methods in computational chemistry at present.\n\nA further step can consist of solving the Schrödinger equation with the total molecular Hamiltonian in order to study the motion of molecules. Direct solution of the Schrödinger equation is called \"quantum molecular dynamics\", within the semiclassical approximation \"semiclassical molecular dynamics\", and within the classical mechanics framework \"molecular dynamics (MD)\". Statistical approaches, using for example Monte Carlo methods, are also possible.\n\nIn adiabatic dynamics, interatomic interactions are represented by single scalar potentials called potential energy surfaces. This is the Born–Oppenheimer approximation introduced by Born and Oppenheimer in 1927. Pioneering applications of this in chemistry were performed by Rice and Ramsperger in 1927 and Kassel in 1928, and generalized into the RRKM theory in 1952 by Marcus who took the transition state theory developed by Eyring in 1935 into account. These methods enable simple estimates of unimolecular reaction rates from a few characteristics of the potential surface.\n\nNon-adiabatic dynamics consists of taking the interaction between several coupled potential energy surface (corresponding to different electronic quantum states of the molecule). The coupling terms are called vibronic couplings. The pioneering work in this field was done by Stueckelberg, Landau, and Zener in the 1930s, in their work on what is now known as the Landau–Zener transition. Their formula allows the transition probability between two diabatic potential curves in the neighborhood of an avoided crossing to be calculated. Spin-forbidden reactions are one type of non-adiabatic reactions where at least one change in spin state occurs when progressing from reactant to product.\n\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "25213", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25213", "title": "QWERTY", "text": "QWERTY\n\nQWERTY is a keyboard layout for Latin script. The name comes from the order of the first six keys on the top left letter row of the keyboard ( ). The QWERTY design is based on a layout created for the Sholes and Glidden typewriter and sold to Remington in 1873. It became popular with the success of the Remington No. 2 of 1878, and remains in widespread use.\n\nThe QWERTY layout was devised and created in the early 1870s by Christopher Latham Sholes, a newspaper editor and printer who lived in Milwaukee, Wisconsin. In October 1867, Sholes filed a patent application for his early writing machine he developed with the assistance of his friends Carlos Glidden and Samuel W. Soulé.\n\nThe first model constructed by Sholes used a piano-like keyboard with two rows of characters arranged alphabetically as shown below:\nThe construction of the \"Type Writer\" had two flaws that made the product susceptible to jams.\nFirstly, characters were mounted on metal arms or typebars, which would clash and jam if neighboring arms were pressed at the same time or in rapid succession. Secondly, its printing point was located beneath the paper carriage, invisible to the operator, a so-called \"up-stroke\" design. Consequently, jams were especially serious, because the typist could only discover the mishap by raising the carriage to inspect what had been typed. The solution was to place commonly used letter-pairs (like \"th\" or \"st\") so that their typebars were not neighboring, avoiding jams.\n\nSholes struggled for the next five years to perfect his invention, making many trial-and-error rearrangements of the original machine's alphabetical key arrangement. The study of bigram (letter-pair) frequency by educator Amos Densmore, brother of the financial backer James Densmore, is believed to have influenced the array of letters, but the contribution was later called into question. Others suggest instead that the letter groupings evolved from telegraph operators' feedback.\n\nIn November 1868 he changed the arrangement of the latter half of the alphabet, O to Z, right-to-left. In April 1870 he arrived at a four-row, upper case keyboard approaching the modern QWERTY standard, moving six vowel letters, A, E, I, O, U, and Y, to the upper row as follows:\nIn 1873 Sholes's backer, James Densmore, successfully sold the manufacturing rights for the Sholes & Glidden Type-Writer to E. Remington and Sons. The keyboard layout was finalized within a few months by Remington's mechanics and was ultimately presented:\n\nAfter they purchased the device, Remington made several adjustments, creating a keyboard with essentially the modern QWERTY layout. These adjustments included placing the \"R\" key in the place previously allotted to the period key. Apocryphal claims that this change was made to let salesmen impress customers by pecking out the brand name \"TYPE WRITER QUOTE\" from one keyboard row are not formally substantiated. Vestiges of the original alphabetical layout remained in the \"home row\" sequence DFGHJKL.\n\nThe modern layout is:\nThe QWERTY layout became popular with the success of the Remington No. 2 of 1878, the first typewriter to include both upper and lower case letters, using a shift key.\n\nThe QWERTY layout depicted in Sholes's 1878 patent is slightly different from the modern layout, most notably in the absence of the numerals 0 and 1, with each of the remaining numerals shifted one position to the left of their modern counterparts. The letter M is located at the end of the third row to the right of the letter L rather than on the fourth row to the right of the N, the letters X and C are reversed, and most punctuation marks are in different positions or are missing entirely. 0 and 1 were omitted to simplify the design and reduce the manufacturing and maintenance costs; they were chosen specifically because they were \"redundant\" and could be recreated using other keys. Typists who learned on these machines learned the habit of using the uppercase letter I (or lowercase letter L) for the digit one, and the uppercase O for the zero.\n\nIn early designs, some characters were produced by printing two symbols with the carriage in the same position. For instance, the exclamation point, which shares a key with the numeral 1 on modern keyboards, could be reproduced by using a three-stroke combination of an apostrophe, a backspace, and a period. A semicolon (;) was produced by printing a comma (,) over a colon (:). As the backspace key is slow in simple mechanical typewriters (the carriage was heavy and optimized to move in the opposite direction), a more professional approach was to block the carriage by pressing and holding the space bar while printing all characters that needed to be in a shared position. To make this possible, the carriage was designed to advance forward only after releasing the space bar.\n\nThe 0 key was added and standardized in its modern position early in the history of the typewriter, but the 1 and exclamation point were left off some typewriter keyboards into the 1970s.\n\nThere were no particular technological requirements for the QWERTY layout since at the time there were ways to make a typewriter without the \"up-stroke\" typebar mechanism that had required it to be devised. Not only were there rival machines with \"down-stroke\" and \"frontstroke\" positions that gave a visible printing point, the problem of typebar clashes could be circumvented completely: examples include Thomas Edison's 1872 electric print-wheel device which later became the basis for Teletype machines; Lucien Stephen Crandall's typewriter (the second to come onto the American market) whose type was arranged on a cylindrical sleeve; the Hammond typewriter of 1887 which used a semi-circular \"type-shuttle\" of hardened rubber (later light metal); and the Blickensderfer typewriter of 1893 which used a type wheel. The early Blickensderfer's \"Ideal\" keyboard was also non-QWERTY, instead having the sequence \"DHIATENSOR\" in the home row, these 10 letters being capable of composing 70% of the words in the English language.\n\nAlternating hands while typing is a desirable trait in a keyboard design. While one hand types a letter, the other hand can prepare to type the next letter, making the process faster and more efficient. However, when a string of letters is typed with the same hand, the chances of stuttering are increased and a rhythm can be broken, thus decreasing speed and increasing errors and fatigue. In the QWERTY layout many more words can be spelled using only the left hand than the right hand. In fact, thousands of English words can be spelled using only the left hand, while only a couple of hundred words can be typed using only the right hand (the three most frequent letters in the English language, ETA, are all typed with the left hand). In addition, more typing strokes are done with the left hand in the QWERTY layout. This is helpful for left-handed people but to the disadvantage of right-handed people.\n\nContrary to popular belief, the QWERTY layout was not designed to slow the typist down, but rather to speed up typing by preventing jams. Indeed, there is evidence that, aside from the issue of jamming, placing often-used keys farther apart increases typing speed, because it encourages alternation between the hands. There is another origin story in the Smithsonian that the QWERTY keyboard was made for telegraph operators and has this layout to make it easy for the telegraph operator to work. (On the other hand, in the German keyboard the Z has been moved between the T and the U to help type the frequent bigraphs TZ and ZU in that language.) Almost every word in the English language contains at least one vowel letter, but on the QWERTY keyboard only the vowel letter \"A\" is located on the home row, which requires the typist's fingers to leave the home row for most words.\n\nA feature much less commented-on than the order of the keys is that the keys do not form a rectangular grid, but rather each column slants diagonally. This is because of the mechanical linkages – each key is attached to a lever, and hence the offset prevents the levers from running into each other – and has been retained in most electronic keyboards. Some keyboards, such as the Kinesis or TypeMatrix, retain the QWERTY layout but arrange the keys in vertical columns, to reduce unnecessary lateral finger motion.\n\nThe words 'typewriter', 'proprietor', 'perpetuity', and 'repertoire' (from French) are the longest English words that can be written using only the keys in the top row.\n\nThe first computer terminals such as the Teletype were typewriters that could produce and be controlled by various computer codes. These used the QWERTY layouts and added keys such as escape (ESC) which had special meanings to computers. Later keyboards added function keys and arrow keys. Since the standardization of PC-compatible computers and Windows after the 1980s, most full-sized computer keyboards have followed this standard (see drawing at right). This layout has a separate numeric keypad for data entry at the right, 12 function keys across the top, and a cursor section to the right and center with keys for Insert, Delete, Home, End, Page Up, and Page Down with cursor arrows in an inverted-T shape.\n\nDifferent computer operating systems have methods of support for input of different languages such as Chinese, Hebrew or Arabic. QWERTY is designed for English, a language with diacritical marks appearing only in a few words of foreign origin. QWERTY keyboards have no standard way of typing an accent. Until recently, no norm was defined for a standard QWERTY keyboard layout allowing the typing of accented characters. The so called \"US-International layout\" is, in fact, OS-dependent. There exist other layouts that try to overcome this shortcoming. One popular is EurKEY which is available for Windows, OS X and Linux.\n\nDepending on the operating system and sometimes the application program being used, there are many ways to generate Latin characters with accents independently of the layout in use.\n\nMinor changes to the arrangement are made for other languages. There are a large number of different keyboard layouts used for different languages written in Latin script. They can be divided into three main families according to where the , , , , and keys are placed on the keyboard. These are usually named after the first six letters.\n\nEnglish-speaking Canadians have traditionally most often used the same keyboard layout as in the United States, unless they are in a position where they have to write French on a regular basis. French-speaking Canadians respectively have favoured the Canadian French keyboard layout (see below).\n\nThe Canadian Multilingual Standard keyboard layout is used by some Canadians. Though this keyboard lacks the caret (^) character, this is easily accomplished by typing the circumflex accent followed by a space.\n\nThis keyboard layout is commonly used in Canada by French-speaking Canadians. It is the most common layout for laptops and stand-alone keyboards targeting French speakers. Unlike the French layout used in France and Belgium, the Canadian French layout is a true QWERTY and as such is also relatively commonly used by English speakers in the US and Canada (using standard QWERTY keyboards) for easy access to accented letters found in some of the French words commonly used in English. It can be used to type all accented French characters, as well as some from other languages. It also serves all English functions as well. It is popular mainly because of its close similarity to the basic US keyboard commonly used by English-speaking Canadians and Americans, historical use of US-made typewriters by French-Canadians, and is the standard for keyboards in Quebec. Use of the European French layout in Quebec is practically unheard of.\n\nIn some variants of this keyboard is (short for Fix Majuscule = Lock Upper Case) or (short for Verrouiller Majuscule = Lock Upper Case), is , and is .\n\nThe typewriter came to the Czech-speaking area in the late 19th century, when it was part of Austria-Hungary where German was the dominant language of administration. Therefore, Czech typewriters have the QWERTZ layout.\nHowever, with the introduction of imported computers, especially since the 1990s, the QWERTY keyboard layout is frequently used for computer keyboards, too. Czech QWERTY layout differs from QWERTZ in that the characters (e.g. @$& and others) missing from the Czech keyboard are accessible with AltGr on the same keys where they are located on an American keyboard. In Czech QWERTZ keyboard the position of these characters accessed through AltGr differs.\n\nBoth the Danish and Norwegian keyboards include dedicated keys for the letters Å/å, Æ/æ and Ø/ø, but the placement is a little different, as the and keys are swapped on the Norwegian layout. (The Finnish–Swedish keyboard is also largely similar to the Norwegian layout, but the and are replaced with and . On some systems, the Danish keyboard may allow typing Ö/ö and Ä/ä by holding the or key while striking and , respectively.)\n\nThough it is seldom used (most Dutch keyboards use US International layout), the Dutch layout uses QWERTY but has additions for the € sign, the diaresis (¨), and the braces ({ }) as well as different locations for other symbols. An older version contained a single-stroke key for the Dutch character IJ/ij, which is usually typed by the combination of and . In the 1990s, there was a version with the now-obsolete florin sign (Dutch: guldenteken) for IBM PCs. In Flanders (the Dutch-speaking part of Belgium), \"AZERTY\" keyboards are used instead, due to influence from the French-speaking part of Belgium.\n\nThe keyboard layout used in Estonia is virtually the same as the Swedish layout. The main difference is that the and keys (to the right of ) are replaced with and respectively (the latter letter being the most distinguishing feature of the Estonian alphabet). Some special symbols and dead keys are also moved around.\n\nBasically the same as the Danish layout with added , since the Faroe Islands are a self-governed part of the Kingdom of Denmark.\n\nThe visual layout used in Finland is basically the same as the Swedish layout. This is practical, as Finnish and Swedish share the special characters Ä/ä and Ö/ö, and while the Swedish Å/å is unnecessary for writing Finnish, it is needed by Swedish-speaking Finns.\n\nAs of 2008, there is a new standard for the Finnish multilingual keyboard layout, developed as part of a localization project by CSC. All the engravings of the traditional Finnish–Swedish visual layout have been retained, so there is no need to change the hardware, but the functionality has been extended considerably, as additional characters (e.g., Æ/æ, Ə/ə, Ʒ/ʒ) are available through the key, as well as dead keys, which allow typing a wide variety of letters with diacritics (e.g., Ç/ç, Ǥ/ǥ, Ǯ/ǯ).\n\nBased on the Latin letter repertory included in the Multilingual European Subset No. 2 (MES-2) of the Unicode standard, the layout has three main objectives. First, it provides for easy entering of text in both Finnish and Swedish, the two official languages of Finland, using the familiar keyboard layout but adding some advanced punctuation options, such as dashes, typographical quotation marks, and the non-breaking space (NBSP).\n\nSecond, it is designed to offer an indirect but intuitive way to enter the special letters and diacritics needed by the other three Nordic national languages (Danish, Norwegian and Icelandic) as well as the regional and minority languages (Northern Sámi, Southern Sámi, Lule Sámi, Inari Sámi, Skolt Sámi, Romani language as spoken in Finland, Faroese, Kalaallisut also known as Greenlandic, and German).\n\nAs a third objective, it allows for relatively easy entering of particularly names (of persons, places or products) in a variety of European languages using a more or less extended Latin alphabet, such as the official languages of the European Union (excluding Bulgarian and Greek). Some letters, like Ł/ł needed for Slavic languages, are accessed by a special \"overstrike\" key combination acting like a dead key. \nHowever, the Romanian letters Ș/ș and Ț/ț (S/s and T/t with comma below) are not supported; the presumption is that Ş/ş and Ţ/ţ (with cedilla) suffice as surrogates.\n\nThe Icelandic keyboard layout is different from the standard QWERTY keyboard because the Icelandic alphabet has some special letters, most of which it shares with the other Nordic countries:\nÞ/þ, Ð/ð, Æ/æ, and Ö/ö. (Æ/æ also occurs in Norwegian, Danish and Faroese, Ð/ð in Faroese, and Ö/ö in Swedish, Finnish and Estonian. In Norwegian Ö/ö could be substituted for Ø/Ø which is the same sound/letter and is widely understood).\n\nThe letters Á/á, Ý/ý, Ú/ú, Í/í, and É/é are produced by first pressing the dead keyand then the corresponding letter. The Nordic letters Å/å and Ä/ä can be produced by first pressing , located below the key, and (for ¨) which also works for the non-Nordic ÿ, Ü/ü, Ï/ï, and Ë/ë. These letters are not used natively in Icelandic, but may have been implemented for ease of communication in other Nordic languages. Additional diacritics may be found behind the key: for ˋ (grave accent) and for ˆ (circumflex).\nMicrosoft Windows includes a Gaelic layout which supports acute accents with for the Irish language and grave accents with the dead key for Scottish Gaelic. The other Insular Celtic languages have their own layout.\nThe UK or UK-Extended layout is also frequently used.\n\n\nThere is an alternate layout, which differs only in disposition of characters accessible through , and includes the tilde and the curly brackets. It is commonly used in IBM keyboards.\n\nItalian typewriters often have the QZERTY layout instead.\n\nThe Italian-speaking part of Switzerland uses the QWERTZ keyboard.\nIn Latvia, the keyboard layout usually used is called ŪGJRMV, and it is specifically designed for the language. The Latvian QWERTY keyboard layout is also used. The Latvian QWERTY keyboard layout is the same as latin ones, but with a dead key, which allows entering special characters (āčēģīķļņšūž, sometimes ō and ŗ). The most common dead key is the apostrophe ('), which is followed by Alt+Gr (Windows default for Latvian layout). Some prefer using tick (`).\n\nThe Maltese language uses Unicode (UTF-8) to display the Maltese diacritics: ċ Ċ; ġ Ġ; ħ Ħ; ż Ż (together with à À; è È; ì Ì; ò Ò; ù Ù). There are two standard keyboard layouts for Maltese, according to \"MSA 100:2002 Maltese Keyboard Standard\"; one of 47 keys and one of 48 keys. The 48-key layout is the most popular.\n\nThe Norwegian languages use the same letters as Danish, but the Norwegian keyboard differs from the Danish layout regarding the placement of the , and (backslash) keys. On the Danish keyboard, the and are swapped. The Swedish keyboard is also similar to the Norwegian layout, but and are replaced with and . On some systems, the Norwegian keyboard may allow typing Ö/ö and Ä/ä by holding the or key while striking and , respectively.\n\nThere is also an alternative keyboard layout called \"Norwegian with Sámi\", which allows for easier input of the characters required to write various Sámi (also known as Lapp) languages. All the Sámi characters are accessed through the key.\n\nOn Macintosh computers, the \"Norwegian\" and \"Norwegian extended\" keyboard layouts have a slightly different placement for some of the symbols obtained with the help of the or keys. Notably, the \"$\" sign is accessed with and \"¢\" with . Furthermore, the frequently used \"@\" is placed between and .\n\nMost typewriters use a QWERTZ keyboard with Polish letters (with diacritical marks) accessed directly (officially approved as \"Typist's keyboard\", , Polish Standard PN-87), which is mainly ignored in Poland as impractical (except custom-made, e.g., in public sector and some Apple computers); the \"Polish programmer's\" () layout has become the \"de facto\" standard, used on virtually all computers sold on the Polish market.\n\nMost computer keyboards in Poland are laid out according to the standard US visual and functional layout. Polish diacritics are accessed by using the \"AltGr\" key with a corresponding similar letter from the base Latin alphabet. Normal capitalization rules apply with respect to \"Shift\" and \"Caps Lock\" keys. For example, to enter \"Ź\", one can type \"Shift+AltGr+X\" with \"Caps Lock\" off, or turn on \"Caps Lock\" and type \"AltGr+X\".\n\nBoth ANSI and ISO mechanical layouts are common sights, and even some non-standard mechanical layouts are in use. ANSI is often preferred, as the additional key provides no additional function, at least in Microsoft Windows where it duplicates the backslash key, while taking space from the Shift key. Many keyboards do not label \"AltGr\" as such, leaving the \"Alt\" marking as in the US layout - the right \"Alt\" key nevertheless functions as \"AltGr\" in this layout, causing possible confusion when keyboard shortcuts with the \"Alt\" key are required (these usually work only with the left \"Alt\") and causing the key to be commonly referred to as \"right Alt\" (). However, keyboards with \"AltGr\" marking are available and it is also officially used by Microsoft when depicting the layout.\n\nAlso, on MS Windows, the tilde character \"~\" (\"Shift\"+\"`\") acts as a dead key to type Polish letters (with diacritical marks) thus, to obtain an \"Ł\", one may press \"Shift\"+\"`\" followed by \"L\". The tilde character is obtained with (\"Shift\"+\"`\") then \"space\".\n\nIn Linux-based systems, the euro symbol is typically mapped to Alt+5 instead of Alt+U, the tilde acts as a normal key, and several accented letters from other European languages are accessible through combinations with left Alt. Polish letters are also accessible by using the compose key.\n\nSoftware keyboards on touchscreen devices usually make the Polish diacritics available as one of the alternatives which show up after long-pressing the corresponding Latin letter. However, modern predictive text and autocorrection algorithms largely mitigate the need to type them directly on such devices.\n\nSee Portuguese keyboard layout\n\nThe Brazilian computer keyboard layout is specified in the ABNT NBR 10346 variant 2 (alphanumeric portion) and 10347 (numeric portion) standards.\n\nEssentially, the Brazilian keyboard contains dead keys for five variants of diacritics in use in the language; the letter Ç, the only application of the cedilla in Portuguese, has its own key. In some keyboard layouts the + combination produces the ₢ character (Unicode 0x20A2), symbol for the old currency cruzeiro, a symbol that is not used in practice (the common abbreviation in the eighties and nineties used to be Cr$). The cent sign ¢, is accessible via +, but is not commonly used for the centavo, subunit of previous currencies as well as the current real, which itself is represented by R$. The Euro sign € is not standardized in this layout. The masculine and feminine ordinals ª and º are accessible via combinations. The section sign § (Unicode U+00A7), in Portuguese called \"parágrafo\", is nowadays practically only used to denote sections of laws.\n\nVariant 2 of the Brazilian keyboard, the only which gained general acceptance (MS Windows treats both variants as the same layout), has a unique mechanical layout, combining some features of the ISO 9995-3 and the \"JIS\" keyboards in order to fit 12 keys between the left and right Shift (compared to the American standard of 10 and the international of 11). Its modern, IBM PS/2-based variations, are thus known as 107-keys keyboards, and the original PS/2 variation was 104-key. Variant 1, never widely adopted, was based on the ISO 9995-2 keyboards. To make this layout usable with keyboards with only 11 keys in the last row, the rightmost key (/?°) has its functions replicated across the +, +, and + combinations.\n\nEssentially, the Portuguese keyboard contains dead keys for five variants of diacritics; the letter Ç, the only application of the cedilla in Portuguese, has its own key, but there are also a dedicated key for the ordinal indicators and a dedicated key for quotation marks. The + combination for producing the euro sign € (Unicode 0x20AC) has become standard. On some QWERTY keyboards the key labels are translated, but the majority are labelled in English.\n\nDuring the 20th century, a different keyboard layout, HCESAR, was in widespread use in Portugal.\n\nThe current Romanian National Standard SR 13392:2004 establishes two layouts for Romanian keyboards: a \"primary\" one and a \"secondary\" one.\n\nThe \"primary\" layout is intended for traditional users who have learned how to type with older, Microsoft-style implementations of the Romanian keyboard. The \"secondary\" layout is mainly used by programmers as it does not contradict the physical arrangement of keys on a US-style keyboard. The \"secondary\" arrangement is used as the default Romanian layout by Linux distributions, as defined in the \"X Keyboard Configuration Database\"\n\nThere are four Romanian-specific characters that are incorrectly implemented in versions of Microsoft Windows prior to Vista:\n\nThe cedilla-versions of the characters do not exist in the Romanian language (they came to be used due to a historic bug). The UCS now says that encoding this was a mistake because it messed up Romanian data and the letters with cedilla and the letters with comma are the same letter with a different style.\n\nSince Romanian hardware keyboards are not widely available, Cristian Secară has created a driver that allows Romanian characters to be generated with a US-style keyboard in all versions of Windows prior to Vista through the use of the AltGr key modifier.\n\nMS Windows 7 now includes the correct diacritical signs in the default Romanian Keyboard layout. This layout has the Z and Y keys mapped like in English layouts and also includes characters like the 'at' (@) and dollar ($) signs, among others. The older cedilla-version layout is still included albeit as the 'Legacy' layout.\n\nIn Slovakia, similarly to the Czech Republic, both QWERTZ and QWERTY keyboard layouts are used. QWERTZ is the default keyboard layout for Slovak in Microsoft Windows.\n\nThe Spanish keyboard layout is used to write in Spanish and in other languages of Spain such as Aragonese, Asturian, Catalan, Occitan, Galician and Basque. It includes Ñ for Spanish, Asturian and Galician, the acute accent, the diaeresis, the left question and exclamation marks (¿, ¡) and, finally, some characters required only for typing Catalan and Occitan that are Ç, the grave accent and the interpunct (' / ', used in \"l·l, n·h, s·h\"; located at Shift-3). It can also be used to write other international characters, such as the circumflex accent (used in French and Portuguese among others) and the tilde (used in both Spanish and Portuguese), which are available as dead keys. However, it lacks two characters used in Asturian: Ḥ and Ḷ (historically, general support for these two has been poor – they aren't present in the ISO 8859-1 character encoding standard, or any other ISO/IEC 8859 standard); several alternative distributions, based on this one or created from scratch, have been created to address this issue (see the Other original layouts and layout design software section for more information).\n\nOn most keyboards, € is marked as Alt Gr + E and not Alt Gr + 5 as shown in the image. However, in some keyboards, € is found marked twice. An alternative version exists, supporting all of ISO 8859-1.\n\nSpanish keyboards are usually labelled in Spanish instead of English, its abbreviations being:\nThe c-cedilla key (Ç), instead of on the right of the acute accent key (´), is located alternatively on some keyboards one or two lines above. In some cases it's placed on the right of the plus sign key (+). In other keyboards it's situated on the right of the inverted exclamation mark key (¡).\n\nThe Hispanic American Spanish keyboard layout is used throughout Mexico, Central and South America. Before its design, Hispanic American vendors had been selling the Spanish (Spain) layout as default.\n\nIts most obvious difference from the Spanish (Spain) layout is the lack of a Ç key; on Microsoft Windows it lacks a tilde (~) dead key, whereas on Linux systems the dead tilde can be optionally enabled. This is not a problem when typing in Spanish, but it is rather problematic when typing in Portuguese, which can be an issue in countries with large commercial ties to Brazil (Argentina, Uruguay and Paraguay).\n\nNormally \"Bloq Mayús\" is used instead of \"Caps Lock\", and \"Intro\" instead of \"Enter\".\n\nThe central characteristics of the Swedish keyboard are the three additional letters Å/å, Ä/ä, and Ö/ö. The same visual layout is also in use in Finland, as the letters Ä/ä and Ö/ö are shared with the Swedish language, and even Å/å is needed by Swedish-speaking Finns. However, the Finnish multilingual keyboard adds new letters and punctuation to the functional layout.\n\nThe Norwegian keyboard largely resembles the Swedish layout, but the and are replaced with and . The Danish keyboard is also similar, but it has the and swapped. On some systems, the Swedish or Finnish keyboard may allow typing Ø/ø and Æ/æ by holding the or key while striking and , respectively.\n\nThe \"Swedish with Sámi\" keyboard allows typing not only Ø/ø and Æ/æ, but even the letters required to write various Sámi (also known as Lapp) languages. This keyboard has the same function for all the keys engraved on the regular Swedish keyboard, and the additional letters are available through the key.\n\nOn Macintosh computers, the \"Swedish\" and \"Swedish Pro\" keyboards differ somewhat from the image shown above, especially as regards the characters available using the or keys. (on the upper row) produces the \"°\" sign, and produces the \"€\" sign. The digit keys produce \"©@£$∞§|[]≈\" with and \"¡\"¥¢‰¶\\{}≠\" with .\n\nOn Linux systems, the Swedish keyboard may also give access to additional characters as follows:\nSeveral of these characters function as dead keys.\n\nToday the majority of Turkish keyboards are based on QWERTY (the so-called Q-keyboard layout), although there is also the older F-keyboard layout specifically designed for the language.\nThe United Kingdom and Ireland use a keyboard layout based on the 48-key version defined in (the now withdrawn) British Standard BS 4822. It is very similar to that of the United States, but has an extra key and a larger Enter key, includes £ and € signs and some rarely used EBCDIC symbols (¬, ¦), and uses different positions for the characters @, \", #, ~, \\, and |. See the article British and American keyboards for details.\n\nThe BS 4822:1994 standard did not make any use of the AltGr key and lacked support for any non-ASCII characters other than ¬ and £. It also assigned a key for the non-ASCII character broken bar (¦), but lacks one for the far more commonly used ASCII character vertical bar (|). It also lacked support for various diacritics used in the Welsh alphabet, and the Scottish Gaelic alphabet; and also is missing the letter yogh, ȝ, used very rarely in the Scots language. Therefore, various manufacturers have modified or extended the BS 4822 standard:\n\nIn many Commonwealth countries and other English-speaking jurisdictions (e.g., Canada, Australia, the Caribbean nations, Hong Kong, Malaysia, India, Pakistan, Bangladesh, Singapore, New Zealand, and South Africa), local spelling conforms more closely to British English usage, while the supplied keyboard is or based on the English (US) keyboard. In Windows 8 and later versions, the backslash (\\) key (left of Z or space) is duplicated onto the hash (#) key (left of Enter), press which with Alt Gr key to type backslash (\\), with Alt Gr and Shift keys to type vertical bar (|). This aids users who are familiar with UK keyboard layout while the keyboard lacks this key (e.g. US Standard keyboard and Japan JIS keyboard).\n\nThe British version of the Apple Keyboard does not use the standard UK layout. Instead, some older versions have the US layout (see below) with a few differences: the sign is reached by and the sign by , the opposite to the US layout. The is also present and is typed with . Umlauts are reached by typing and then the vowel, and ß is reached by typing .\n\nNewer Apple \"British\" keyboards use a layout that is relatively unlike either the US or traditional UK keyboard. It uses an elongated return key, a shortened left with and in the newly created position, and in the upper left of the keyboard are and instead of the traditional EBCDIC codes. The middle-row key that fits inside the key has and .\n\nFrom Windows XP SP2 onwards, Microsoft has included a variant of the British QWERTY keyboard (the \"United Kingdom Extended\" keyboard layout) that can additionally generate several diacritical marks. This supports input on a standard physical UK keyboard for many languages without changing positions of frequently used keys, which is useful when working with text in Welsh and Scottish Gaelic — languages native to parts of the UK (Wales and parts of Scotland respectively).\n\nAlthough the rarely used grave accent key becomes, as it also does in the US International layout, a dead key modifying the character generated by the next key pressed, the apostrophe, double-quote, tilde and caret keys are not changed. Instead, the additional characters are obtained using the key. The extended keyboard is software installed from the Windows control panel, and the extended characters are not normally engraved on keyboards.\n\nApple's Mac OS X does not include UK Extended, as it has key combinations for accents on any keyboard layout.\n\nThe UK International keyboard uses mostly the AltGr key to add diacritics to the letters a, e, i, n, o, u, w and y (the last two being used in Welsh) as appropriate for each character, as well as to their capitals. Pressing the key and then a character that does not take the specific diacritic produces the behaviour of a standard keyboard. The key presses followed by spacebar generate a stand-alone mark.:\n\n\nThe and letter method used for acutes and cedillas does not work for applications which assign shortcut menu functions to these key combinations. For acute accents the and apostrophe method should be used.\n\nThese combinations are intended to be mnemonic and designed to be easy to remember: the circumflex accent (e.g. â) is similar to a caret (codice_1), printed above the key; the diaeresis/umlaut (e.g. ö) is visually similar to the double-quote (codice_2) above on the UK keyboard; the tilde (codice_3) is printed on the same key as the .\n\nThe UK \"extended\" layout is almost entirely transparent to users familiar with the UK layout. A machine with the extended layout behaves exactly as with the standard UK, except for the rarely used grave accent key. This makes this layout suitable for a machine for shared or public use by a user population in which some use the extended functions.\n\nDespite being created for multilingual users, UK-Extended does have some gaps — there are many languages that it cannot cope with, including Romanian and Turkish, and all languages with different character sets, such as Greek and Russian. It also does not cater for the ß in German, nor for the å, æ, ø, ð, þ in Nordic languages.\n\nThe arrangement of the character input keys and the Shift keys contained in this layout is specified in the U.S. American national standard ANSI-INCITS 154-1988 (R1999) (formerly ANSI X3.154-1988 (R1999)), where this layout is called \"ASCII keyboard\". The complete US keyboard layout, as it is usually found, also contains the usual function keys in accordance with the international standard ISO/IEC 9995-2, although this is not explicitly required by the US American national standard.\n\nUS keyboards are used not only in the United States, but also in many other English-speaking places, including India, Australia, English Canada, Hong Kong, New Zealand, South Africa, Malaysia, Singapore and Philippines. However, the United Kingdom and Ireland use a slightly different layout.\n\nThe US keyboard layout has a second Alt key instead of the AltGr key and does not use any dead keys; this makes it inefficient for all but a handful of languages. On the other hand, the US keyboard layout (or the similar UK layout) is occasionally used by programmers in countries where the keys for []{} are located in less convenient positions on the locally customary layout.\n\nOn some keyboards the enter key is bigger than traditionally and takes up also a part of the line above, more or less the area of the traditional location of the backslash key (\\). In these cases the backslash is located in alternative places. It can be situated one line above the default location, on the right of the equals sign key (=). Sometimes it's placed one line below its traditional situation, on the right of the apostrophe key (') (in these cases the enter key is narrower than usual on the line of its default location). It may also be two lines below its default situation on the right of a narrower than traditionally right shift key. A variant of this layout is used in Arabic-speaking countries.\n\nAn alternative layout uses the physical US keyboard to type diacritics in some operating systems (including Windows). This is the US-International layout, which uses the right key as an key to support many additional characters directly as an additional shift key. (Since many smaller keyboards don't have a right key, Windows also allows + to be used as a substitute for .) This layout also uses keys , , , and as dead keys to generate characters with diacritics by pressing the appropriate key, then the letter on the keyboard. The international keyboard is a software setting installed from the Windows control panel or similar; the additional functions (shown in blue) may or may not be engraved on the keyboard, but are always functional. It can be used to type most major languages from Western Europe: Afrikaans, Danish, Dutch, English, Faroese, Finnish, French, German, Icelandic, Irish, Italian, Norwegian, Portuguese, Scottish Gaelic, Spanish, and Swedish. Some less common western European languages, such as Maltese and Welsh, are not fully supported by the US-International keyboard layout.\n\nA diacritic key is activated by pressing and releasing it, then pressing the letter that requires a diacritic. After the two strokes, the single character with diacritics is generated. Note that only certain letters, such as vowels and \"n\", can have diacritics in this way. To generate the symbols ', `, \", ^ and ~, when the following character is capable of having a diacritic, press the after the key.\n\nCharacters with diacritics can be typed with the following combinations:\n\nThe US-International layout is not entirely transparent to users familiar with the US layout; when using a machine with the international layout the commonly used single- and double-quote keys and the less commonly used grave accent, tilde, and caret keys behave unexpectedly. This could be disconcerting on a machine for shared or public use.\n\nThere are also alternative US-International formats, whereby modifier keys such as shift and alt are used, and the keys for the characters with diacritics are in different places from their unmodified counterparts, for example, using the AltGr modifier key to activate dead keys, so that the ASCII quotation marks or circumflex symbol are not affected and can be typed normally with a single keystroke.\n\nThe standard keyboard layout in the Netherlands is US-International, as it provides easy access to diacritics on common UK- or US-like keyboards. The Dutch layout is historical, and keyboards with this layout are rarely used. Many US keyboards sold do not have the extra US-International characters or engraved on the keys, although € () always is; nevertheless, the keys work as expected even if not marked. Many computer-literate Dutch people have retained the old habit of using + number codes to type accented characters; others routinely type without diacritics, then use a spelling checker to produce the correct forms.\n\nThere are three kinds of Apple Keyboards for English: the United States, the United Kingdom and International English. The International English version is almost identical to the United States version, but some features are identical to the United Kingdom version:\n\n\nThe Vietnamese keyboard layout is an extended Latin QWERTY layout. The letters Ă, Â, Ê, and Ô are found on what would be the number keys – on the US English keyboard, with – producing the tonal marks (grave accent, hook, tilde, acute accent and dot below, in that order), producing Đ, producing the đồng sign (₫) when not shifted, and brackets () producing Ư and Ơ.\n\nEurKEY is a free and open source US-based layout which provides easy access to many diacritics of European languages as well as to common math symbols and Greek letters. It is available for Windows, OS X, Linux (shipped with xkeyboard-config).\n\nSeveral alternatives to QWERTY have been developed over the years, claimed by their designers and users to be more efficient, intuitive, and ergonomic. Nevertheless, none have seen widespread adoption, partly due to the sheer dominance of available keyboards and training. Although some studies have suggested that some of these may allow for faster typing speeds, many other studies have failed to do so, and many of the studies claiming improved typing speeds were severely methodologically flawed or deliberately biased, such as the studies administered by Dvorak himself before and after World War II. Economists Stan Liebowitz and Stephen Margolis have noted that rigorous studies are inconclusive as to whether they actually offer any real benefits, and some studies on keyboard layout have suggested that, for a skilled typist, layout is largely irrelevant – even randomized and alphabetical keyboards allow for similar typing speeds to QWERTY and Dvorak keyboards, and that switching costs always outweigh the benefits of further training on whichever keyboard you already use.\n\nThe most widely used such alternative is the Dvorak Simplified Keyboard; another alternative is Colemak, which is based partly on QWERTY and is claimed to be easier for an existing QWERTY typist to learn while offering several supposed optimisations. Most modern computer operating systems support these and other alternative mappings with appropriate special mode settings, with some modern operating systems allowing the user to map their keyboard in any way they like, but few keyboards are manufactured with keys labeled according to any other standard.\n\nSome people have compared Dvorak and QWERTY to other keyboard input systems, namely stenotype and its implementations (e.g., opensource PLOVER ). These systems provide some advantage (including a 700% increase in efficiency over QWERTY) but they are fundamentally different from ordinary typing. Words are input by pressing on several keys and releasing simultaneously but don't require the keys to be pressed down in any order. Neither is the spacebar used. There is a learning hurdle in that hunt and peck does not work. However, it is easy to write at 180–300 wpm. It is worth noting that PLOVER stenotype theory required a stenotype machine prior to 2010; due to the inherent difficulties of chording QWERTY was invented to allow machines to be made that didn't jam up; stenotype was invented for maximum speed and accuracy.\n\nThe first typed shorthand machines appeared around 1880, roughly current with QWERTY, but the first stenotype machines appeared in 1913. Also, these machines' output needed to be interpreted by a trained professional, comparable to reading Gregg shorthand, which was very much in vogue at the time and taught publicly until the 1980s. Gregg shorthand also didn't require much more than training and a pen, however machines gradually gained traction in the courtroom. Modern PLOVER immediately provides translated output, making it very much like other keyboard setups that immediately produce legible work.\n\nA half QWERTY keyboard is a combination of an alpha-numeric keypad and a QWERTY keypad, designed for mobile phones. In a half QWERTY keyboard, two characters share the same key, which reduces the number of keys and increases the surface area of each key, useful for mobile phones that have little space for keys. It means that 'Q' and 'W' share the same key and the user must press the key once to type 'Q' and twice to type 'W'.\n\n\nCitations\nInformational notes\n\n"}
{"id": "25215", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25215", "title": "Quake III Arena", "text": "Quake III Arena\n\nQuake III Arena is a multiplayer-focused first-person shooter video game released in December 1999. The game was developed by id Software and featured music composed by Sonic Mayhem and Front Line Assembly founder, Bill Leeb. \"Quake III Arena\" is the third game in the \"Quake\" series and differs from previous games by excluding a traditional single-player element, instead focusing on multiplayer action. The single-player mode is played against computer-controlled bots.\n\nNotable features of \"Quake III Arena\" include the minimalist design, lacking rarely used items and features, the extensive customizability of player settings such as field of view, texture detail and enemy model, and advanced movement features such as strafe-jumping and rocket-jumping.\n\n\"Quake III Arena\" is available on a number of platforms and contains mature content. The game was highly praised by reviewers who, for the most part, described the gameplay as fun and engaging. Many liked the crisp graphics and focus on multiplayer.\n\n\"Quake III Arena\" has also been used extensively in professional electronic sports tournaments such as QuakeCon, Cyberathlete Professional League, Dreamhack, and the Electronic Sports World Cup.\n\nUnlike its predecessors, \"Quake III Arena\" does not have a plot-based single-player campaign. Instead, it simulates the multiplayer experience with computer-controlled players known as bots. The game's story is brief - 'the greatest warriors of all time fight for the amusement of a race called the Vadrigar in the Arena Eternal.' The introduction video shows the abduction of such a warrior, Sarge, while making a last stand. Continuity with prior games in the \"Quake\" series and even \"Doom\" is maintained by the inclusion of player models and biographical information. A familiar mixture of gothic and technological map architecture as well as specific equipment is included, such as the Quad Damage power-up, the infamous rocket launcher, and the BFG super-weapon.\n\nIn \"Quake III Arena\", the player progresses through tiers of maps, combating different bot characters that increase in difficulty, from Crash (at Tier 0) to Xaero (at Tier 7). As the game progresses, the fights take place in more complex arenas and against tougher opponents. While deathmatch maps are designed for up to 16 players, tournament maps are designed for duels between 2 players and in the single-player game could be considered 'boss battles'.\n\nThe weapons are balanced by role, with each weapon having advantages in certain situations, such as the railgun at long-range and the lightning gun at close quarters. The BFG super-weapon is an exception to this; compared to other similarly named weapons in the \"Doom\"/\"Quake\" series, \"Quake III Arena\"'s incarnation of this weapon is basically a fast-firing rocket launcher and it is found in hard-to-reach locations. Weapons appear as level items, spawning at regular intervals in set locations on the map. If a player dies, all of their weapons are lost and they receive the spawn weapons for the current map, usually the gauntlet and machine gun. Players also drop the weapon they were using when killed, which other players can then pick up.\n\n\"Quake III Arena\" comes with several gameplay modes; Free for All (FFA), a classic deathmatch, where each player competes against the rest for the highest score, Team Deathmatch (TDM), where usually two teams of four compete for the highest team frag total, Tournament (1v1), a deathmatch between two players, usually ending after a set time, and Capture the Flag, which is played on symmetrical maps where teams have to recover the enemy flag from the opponents' base while retaining their own.\n\n\"Quake III Arena\" was specifically designed for multiplayer. The game allows players whose computers are connected by a network or to the internet, to play against each other in real time, and incorporates a handicap system. It employs a client–server model, requiring all players' clients to connect to a server. \"Quake III Arena\"'s focus on multiplayer gameplay spawned a lively community, similar to QuakeWorld, that is active to this day.\n\nDuring early March 1999, ATI leaked the internal hardware vendor (IHV) copy of the game. This was a functional version of the engine with a textured level and working guns. The IHV contained most of the weapons (excepting the Gauntlet) that would make it into the final game although most were not fully modeled; a chainsaw and grappling hook were also in the IHV but did not make it into the final release. Many of the sounds that would make it into the final release were also included.\n\nAfter the IHV fiasco, id Software released a beta of the game called \"Quake III Arena Test\" on April 24, 1999. The Q3Test started with version 1.05 and included three levels that would be included in the final release: dm7, dm17, and q3tourney2. Id Software continued to update Q3Test up until version 1.09.\n\nDuring the game's testing it was found that the lightning gun was too dominating. Its strength was reduced to the point that some players have found it useless. Weapon balance was achieved by examining earlier games in the series, \"Quake\" and \"Quake II.\" In the first \"Quake\", the rocket launcher was so effective that it overshadowed other weapons and dominated entire deathmatches, but this was toned down so much in \"Quake II\" that it lost its appeal. The rocket launcher in \"Quake III\" is effective but not overpowering, allowing it to be countered in many situations.\n\nid co-founder and former technical director John Carmack has stated that \"Quake III Arena\" is his favourite game he has worked on.\n\nThe \"id Tech 3\" engine is the name given to the engine that was developed for \"Quake III Arena\". Unlike most other games released at the time, \"Quake III Arena\" requires an OpenGL-compliant graphics accelerator to run. The game does not include a software renderer.\n\nThe graphic technology of the game is based tightly around a \"shader\" system where the appearance of many surfaces can be defined in text files referred to as \"shader scripts.\" \"Quake 3\" also introduced spline-based curved surfaces in addition to planar volumes, which are responsible for many of the surfaces present within the game. \"Quake 3\" also provided support for models animated using vertex animation with attachment tags (known as the .md3 format), allowing models to maintain separate torso and leg animations and hold weapons. \"Quake 3\" is one of the first games where the third-person model is able to look up and down and around as the head, torso and legs are separate. Other visual features include volumetric fog, mirrors, portals, decals, and wave-form vertex distortion.\n\nFor networking, id Tech 3 uses a \"snapshot\" system to relay information about game \"frames\" to the client over UDP. The server attempts to omit as much information as possible about each frame, relaying only differences from the last frame the client confirmed as received (Delta encoding). \"id Tech 3\" uses a virtual machine to control object behavior on the server, effects and prediction on the client and the user interface. This presents many advantages as mod authors do not need to worry about crashing the entire game with bad code, clients could show more advanced effects and game menus than was possible in \"Quake II\" and the user interface for mods was entirely customizable. Unless operations which require a specific endianness are used, a QVM file will run the same on any platform supported by \"Quake III Arena.\" The engine also contains bytecode compilers for the x86 and PowerPC architectures, executing QVM instructions via an interpreter.\n\n\"Quake III Arena\" features an advanced AI with five difficulty levels which can accommodate both a beginner and an advanced player, though they usually do not pose a challenge to high-tier or competitive players. Each bot has its own, often humorous, 'personality', expressed as scripted lines that are triggered to simulate real player chat. If the player types certain phrases, the bots may respond: for example, typing \"You bore me\" might cause a bot to reply \"You should have been here 3 hours ago!\". Each bot has a number of alternative lines to reduce the repetition of bot chatter. The Gladiator bots from \"Quake II\" were ported to \"Quake III Arena\" and incorporated into the game by their creator - Jan Paul van Waveren, aka Mr. Elusive. Bot chat lines were written by R. A. Salvatore, Seven Swords and Steve Winter. Xaero, the hardest opponent in the game, was based on the Gladiator bot Zero. The bot Hunter appears on magazine covers in the later id game Doom 3.\n\nOn August 19, 2005, id Software released the complete source code for \"Quake III Arena\" under the GNU General Public License, as they have for most of their prior engines. As before, the \"engine\", but not the content such as textures and models, was released, so that anyone who wishes to build the game from source will still need an original copy of the game to play it as intended.\n\nLike its predecessors, \"Quake\" and \"Quake II\", \"Quake III Arena\" can be heavily modified, allowing the engine to be used for many different games. Mods range from small gameplay adjustments like \"Rocket Arena 3\" and \"Orange Smoothie Productions\" to total conversions such as \"Smokin' Guns\", \"DeFRaG\", and \"Loki's Revenge\". The source code's release has allowed total conversion mods such as \"Tremulous\", \"World of Padman\", \"OpenArena\", and \"Urban Terror\" to evolve into free standalone games. Other mods like \"Weapons Factory Arena\" have moved to more modern commercial engines. \"Challenge ProMode Arena\" became the primary competitive mod for \"Quake III Arena\" since the Cyberathlete Professional League announced CPMA as its basis for competition. CPMA includes alternative gameplays, including air-control, rebalanced weapons, instant weapon switching, and additional jumping techniques.\n\nAn expansion pack titled \"Quake III: Team Arena\" was released on December 18, 2000 in North America, January 15, 2001 in Japan and January 26, 2001 in Europe. It was developed by id Software and published by Activision. The expansion focused on team-based gameplay through new game modes, as well as the addition of three new weapons (the Chaingun, Nailgun, and Prox Launcher), and new items and player models. \"Quake III: Team Arena\" was criticized, as its additions were long overdue and had already been implemented by fan modifications. \"Quake III: Gold\" was later released on September 26, 2001 in North America, March 29, 2002 in Japan and August 9, 2002 in Europe, including the original \"Quake III Arena\" and the \"Quake III: Team Arena\" expansion pack bundled together. Front Line Assembly made the soundtrack for the expansion, the counterpart to Sonic Mayhem's \"Quake III Arena: Noize\".\n\n\"Quake III Arena\" was released for the Dreamcast (ported by Raster Productions and released by Sega) in 2000 and featured 4 player online play versus Dreamcast and PC gamers. It is often considered one of the best PC to console ports of its time due to its smooth frame rate and online play. There are still communities that play this version online on the remaining dedicated servers running patch version 1.16n and the required map pack. Bullfrog Productions ported \"Quake III Revolution\" was released for the PlayStation 2 in 2001, (released by Electronic Arts in North American and EA Square in Japan) featuring several elements adopted from \"Team Arena\", along with a more mission-based single-player mode. It features split-screen multiplayer for up to 4 players, but lacks mouse support. It also lacks online play, as the PS2's network adapter was not released outside of Japan until 2004. Gamerankings.com rated the release at 83%. The PlayStation 2 version was widely criticized for having long loading times (which typically averaged over a minute).\n\n\"Quake III: Team Arena\" was revealed in an ESRB listing for the Xbox 360. The title was developed by Pi Studios. \"Quake III Arena\" for the 360 was officially announced by id at QuakeCon 2007. The title, jointly developed by id and Pi studios, was released on Xbox Live Arcade on December 15, 2010. The retail price of the game was set at 1200 Microsoft Points, or $15 USD. \"Quake Arena DS\" for the Nintendo DS was announced at QuakeCon on August 4, 2007. John Carmack announced the game and said that touch screen controls would not be implemented as much as in \"Metroid Prime Hunters\", for example. He stated that he would like all shooting in the game to be controlled with the D-pad instead of the Touch Screen. \"Quake Zero\" was announced at QuakeCon on August 3, 2007 and will be an updated version of \"Quake 3 Arena\", distributed by free download, run in a browser window and supported by built-in advertising content. On February 20, 2008 id announced that \"Quake Zero\" would be launched as \"Quake Live\". \"Quake Live\" was released in 2010.\n\n\"Quake III Arena\" has been unofficially ported to several consoles, including the PlayStation Portable handheld and Xbox console. These versions require a modified console or handheld and the assets to the game to go along with the source port.\n\nCarmack has said that Quake Trilogy (including Arena) will be ported on the iPhone/iPod Touch/iPad. An unofficial version for iOS was released through Cydia for jailbroken iOS devices in April 2008; it is a demo version similar to the original except that it integrates the iPhone and iPod Touch's accelerometer and touch controls to make gameplay possible. A high-definition version for iPad was released in November 2010, featuring re-created controls, sharper graphics, better gameplay, and better framerate; this improved version was also integrated into the iPhone and iPod touch version of the port.\n\nA Moorestown prototype version was demonstrated on a reference design that demonstrated performance of up to 90 frames per second. An unofficial port of Quake III for Symbian mobile devices was made. It requires PAK files from original game to run. An unofficial port of the game to Android was created based on the released source code. This means the game can be run on several Android powered devices, most notably the Motorola Milestone, Motorola Droid, and the Nexus One, as well as other high specification Handsets.\n\nIn August 2011, the ARM-based Raspberry Pi credit card-sized computer was shown running a specially compiled ARM version of \"Quake III\" on Debian.\n\nReviews for the game were very positive, with many describing the game as fast and addictive. Curved surfaces were a welcome addition to the series. Most reviewers felt the game was best when played with others online. A GameSpot review by Jeff Gerstmann described the game as outstanding. He noted the fun level designs, great-looking textures, impressive special effects and weapons sounds. The GameSpot review criticised the narrator's voice and thought that some levels could become too crowded when playing multiplayer. An IGN review felt the game lacked originality but enjoyed the detailed wall textures and outer space jump levels. The high number of character skins and the artificial intelligence of opponent bots were praised but the weapons were said to be \"bland and predictable\". A Eurogamer review described the game as \"polished\" and \"stunning\" and thought that it \"was extremely well balanced and plays very well\". The reviewer was especially pleased with the customisable 3D engine and looked forward to new maps and mods.\n\n\"Quake III Arena\"'s multiplayer-focused development led to it developing a large community of competitive players and like its predecessors it was used extensively in professional electronic sports tournaments. In competitive \"Quake III Arena\" there are two distinct gameplays, often referred to as 'rulesets', the out-of-the-box \"Quake III Arena\" game, also known as vanilla \"Quake 3\" (VQ3), and the CPM ruleset of the \"Challenge Pro Mode Arena\" mod. On July 26, 2006, \"Challenge Pro Mode Arena\" with VQ3 gameplay was chosen by Cyberathlete Professional League as the mod of choice for their tournament, making it the standard competitive mod for \"Quake III Arena\". Previously, \"Orange Smoothie Productions\" was the most widely used tournament mod.\n\nThe following competitions have held \"Quake III\" events:\n\n\nThese competitions have now moved on to more recent games or have transitioned to its variant successor, \"Quake Live\".\n\n"}
{"id": "25216", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25216", "title": "Quake II", "text": "Quake II\n\nQuake II is a first-person shooter video game released in December 1997. It was developed by id Software and published by Activision. It is not a direct sequel to \"Quake\"; id decided to revert to an existing trademark when they were unable to agree on a new name that did not violate another company's trademark.\n\nThe soundtrack for \"Quake II\" was mainly provided by Sonic Mayhem, with some additional tracks by Bill Brown; the main theme was also composed by Bill Brown and Rob Zombie, and one track by Jer Sypult.\n\nThe soundtrack for the Nintendo 64 version of the game was composed by Aubrey Hodges, credited as Ken \"Razor\" Richmond.\n\nThe game is played in general first-person shooter paradigms, in which the player shoots enemies from the perspective of the main character. The gameplay is very similar to that featured in \"Quake\", in terms of movement and controls, although the player's movement speed has been slowed down, and the player now has the ability to crouch. The game retains four of the eight weapons from \"Quake\" (the Shotgun, Super Shotgun, Grenade Launcher, and Rocket Launcher), although they have been redesigned visually and made to function in slightly different ways. The remainder of \"Quake\"s eight weapons (the Axe, Nailgun, Super Nailgun, and Thunderbolt) are not present in \"Quake II\". The six newly introduced weapons are the Blaster, Machine Gun, Chain Gun, Hyperblaster, Railgun, and BFG10K. The Quad Damage power up from \"Quake\" is still present in \"Quake II\", and new power-ups include the Ammo Pack, Invulnerability, Bandolier, Enviro-Suit, Rebreather, and Silencer.\n\nThe single player game features a number of changes from \"Quake\". First, the player is given mission-based objectives that correspond to the storyline, including stealing a Tank Commander's head to open a door and calling down an air-strike on a bunker. CGI cutscenes are used to illustrate the player's progress through the main objectives, although they are all essentially the same short piece of video, showing a computerized image of the player character as he moves through game's levels. Another addition is the inclusion of a non-hostile character type: the player character's captured comrades. It is not possible to interact with these characters, however, as they have all been driven insane by their Strogg captors.\n\nThe game features much larger levels than \"Quake\", with many more wide open areas. There is also a hub system that allows the player to travel back and forth between levels, which is necessary to complete certain objectives. Some of the textures and symbols that appear in the game are very similar to some of those found in \"Quake\". Enemies also demonstrate visible wounds after they have taken damage.\n\nThe multiplayer portion is similar to that of \"Quake\". It can be played as a free-for-all deathmatch game mode, a cooperative version of the single-player game, or as a 1 vs 1 match that is used in official tournaments, like the Cyberathlete Professional League. It can also be played in Capture the Flag mode (CTF).\nThe deathmatch game benefited from the release of eight specifically designed levels that id Software added after the game's initial release. They were introduced to the game via one of the early patches, that were released free of charge. Prior to the release of these maps, players were limited to playing multiplayer games on the single-player levels, which, while functional as multiplayer levels, were not designed with deathmatch gameplay specifically in mind.\n\nAs in \"Quake\", it is possible to customize the way in which the player appears to other people in multiplayer games. However, whereas in \"Quake\", the only option was to change the color of the player's uniform unless third party modifications were used, now the game comes with a selection of three different player models: a male marine, a female marine, and a male cyborg; choice of player model also affects the speech effects the player's character will make, such as exhaling in effort while jumping or groaning when injured. Each model can be customized from in the in-game menu via the selection of pre-drawn skins, which differ in many ways; for example, skin color, camouflage style, and application of facepaint.\n\n\"Quake II\" takes place in a science fiction environment. In the single-player game, the player assumes the role of a Marine named Bitterman taking part in \"Operation Alien Overlord\", a desperate attempt to prevent an alien invasion of Earth by launching a counterattack against the home planet of the hostile Strogg civilization. Most of the other soldiers are captured or killed as soon as they approach the planned landing zone. Bitterman survives only because another Marine's personal capsule collided with his upon launch, causing him to crash far short of the landing zone. It falls upon Bitterman to penetrate the Strogg capital city alone and assassinate the Strogg leader, the Makron.\n\nOriginally, Quake II was supposed to be an entirely new game and IP; titles like 'Strogg,' 'Lock and Load,' and even just 'Load' were toyed with in the early days of development. But after numerous failed attempts, the team at id decided to stick with 'Quake II' and forego the gothic Lovecraftian theme from the original in favor of a more sci-fi aesthetic.\n\nArtist and co-owner Adrian Carmack had said that Quake II is his favorite game in the series because \"it was different and a cohesive project.\"\n\nUnlike \"Quake\", where hardware accelerated graphics controllers were supported only with later patches, \"Quake II\" came with OpenGL support out of the box. Later downloads from id Software added support for AMD's 3DNow! instruction set for improved performance on their K6-2 processors, and Rendition released a native renderer for their V1000 graphics chip. The latest version is 3.21. This update includes numerous bug fixes and new levels designed for multiplayer deathmatch. Version 3.21, available as source code on id Software's FTP server, has no improved functionality over version 3.20 and is simply a slight modification to make compiling for Linux easier.\n\n\"Quake II\" uses an improved client–server network model introduced in \"Quake\". The game code of \"Quake II\", which defines all the functionality for weapons, entities, and game mechanics, can be changed in any way because id Software published the source code of their own implementation that shipped with the game. \"Quake II\" uses the shared library functionality of the operating system to load the game library at run-time—this is how mod authors are able to alter the game and provide different gameplay mechanics, new weapons, and much more. The full source code to \"Quake II\" version 3.19 was released under the terms of the GNU GPL on December 22, 2001. Version 3.21 followed later. A LCC-friendly version was released on January 1, 2002 by a modder going by the name of Major Bitch.\n\nSince the release of the \"Quake II\" source code, several third-party update projects to the game engine have been created; the most prominent of these are projects focused on graphical enhancements to the game such as \"Quake2maX\", \"EGL\", \"Quake II Evolved\", and \"KMQuake II\". The source release also revealed numerous critical security flaws which can result in remote compromise of both the \"Quake II\" client and server. As id Software no longer maintains \"Quake II\", most third-party engines include fixes for these bugs. The unofficial patch 3.24 that fixes bugs and adds only meager tweaks is recommended for \"Quake II\" purists, as it is not intended to add new features or be an engine mod in its own right. The most popular server-side engine modification for multiplayer, \"R1Q2\", is generally recommended as a replacement for the 3.20 release for both clients and servers. In July 2003, Vertigo Software released a port of \"Quake II\" for the Microsoft .NET platform, using Managed C++, called \"Quake II .NET\". It became a poster application for the language, showcasing the powerful interoperability between .NET and standard C++ code. It remains one of the top downloads on the Visual C++ website. In May 2004, Bytonic Software released a port of \"Quake II\" (called \"Jake2\") written in Java using JOGL. In 2010 Google ported \"Jake2\" to HTML5, running in Safari and Chrome.\n\n\"Quake II\"s game engine was a popular license, and formed the basis for several commercial and free games, such as \"\", \"War§ow\", \"SiN\", \"Anachronox\", \"Heretic II\", \"Daikatana\", \"Soldier of Fortune\", \"\", and \"\". Valve Corporation's 1998 video game \"Half-Life\", which went on to sell over eight million copies, was originally going to use the \"Quake II\" engine during early development stages. However, the final version runs on a heavily modified version of the \"Quake\" engine, \"GoldSrc\", with a small amount of the \"Quake II\" code.\n\nPorts of \"Quake II\" were released in 1999 on the Nintendo 64 (ported by Raster Productions) and PlayStation (ported by Hammerhead) video game consoles. In both cases, the core gameplay was largely identical; however, changes were made to the game sequence and split-screen multiplayer replaced network or Internet play. A Macintosh port was developed by Logicware and released in 1999. \"Quake II: Colossus\" (\"Quake II\" with both official add-ons) was ported to Linux by id Software and published by Macmillan Digital Publishing in 1999. Be Inc. officially ported \"Quake II: Colossus\" to the BeOS to test their OpenGL acceleration in 1999, and provided the game files for free download at a later date—a Windows, Macintosh, or Linux install CD was required to install the game, with the official add-ons being optional.\n\n\"Jake2\" is a \"Quake II\" port shown by the JOGL team for JavaOne 2004, to present an example of Java-OpenGL interoperability. \"Jake2\" has since been used by Sun as an example of Java Web Start capabilities for games distribution over the Internet. In 2009, Tectoy Digital ported \"Quake II\" to the Brazilian gaming console Zeebo. The game is available for free, but does not feature CG movies or multiplayer support of any kind.\nThe PlayStation version contains abridged versions of Units 1, 3, 6, 7, 8, and 10 of the PC version, redesigned to meet the console's technical limitations. For example, many short airlock-like corridors were added to maps to provide loading pauses inside what were contiguous areas in the PC version. In addition, part of the first mission of the N64 port is used as a prologue. Some enemy types were removed and two new enemies was added: the Arachnid, a human-spider cyborg with twin railgun arms, and the Guardian, a bipedal boss enemy. Saving the game is only possible between levels and at mid-level checkpoints where the game loads, while in the PC version the game could be saved and loaded at any time. The game supports the PlayStation Mouse peripheral to provide a greater parity with the PC version's gameplay. The music used in this port is a combination of the \"Quake II\" original music score and tracks from the PC version's mission packs, while the opening and closing cut-scenes are taken from the Ground Zero expansion pack.\n\nThe PlayStation version uses a new engine developed by Hammerhead for their future PlayStation projects and runs at a 520x240 resolution at 30 frames per second. The developer was keen to retain a visual parity with the PC version and avoid tricks such as the use of environmental fog. Colored lights for levels and enemies, and yellow highlights for gunfire and explosions, are carried across from the PC version, with the addition of lens flare effects located around the light sources on the original lightmaps. There is no skybox; instead, a flat Gouraud-textured purple sky is drawn around the top of the level. The game uses particles to render blood, debris, and rail gun beams analogously to the PC version.\n\nThere is also a split-screen multiplayer mode for two to four players (a four player game is possible using the PlayStation's Multi-tap). The only available player avatar is a modified version of the male player avatar from the PC version, the most noticeable difference being the addition of a helmet. Players can only customize the color of their avatar's armor and change their name. The twelve multiplayer levels featured are unique to the PlayStation version, with none of the PC multiplayer maps being carried over.\n\nThe Nintendo 64 version has completely different single player levels and multiplayer maps, and features multiplayer support for up to four players. This version also has new lighting effects, mostly seen in gunfire, and also uses the Expansion Pak for extra graphical detail. This port also features an entirely new soundtrack, consisting mostly of dark ambient pieces, composed by Aubrey Hodges.\n\nA port of \"Quake II\" was included with \"Quake 4\" for the Xbox 360 on a bonus disc. This is a direct port of the original game, with some graphical improvements. However, it allows for System Link play for up to sixteen players, split-screen for four players, and cooperative play in single-player for up to sixteen players or four players with split-screen alone.\n\nAs with the original \"Quake\", \"Quake II\" was designed to allow players to easily create custom content. A large number of mods, maps, graphics such as player models and skins, and sound effects were created and distributed to others free of charge via the Internet. Popular websites such as PlanetQuake and Telefragged allowed players to gain access to custom content. Another improvement over \"Quake\" was that it was easier to select custom player models, skins, and sound effects because they could be selected from an in-game menu. Two unofficial expansions were released on CDs in 1998: \"Zaero\", developed by Team Evolve and published by Macmillan Digital Publishing, and \"\", developed by Canopy Games and published by HeadGames Publishing. Other notable mods include \"Action Quake 2\", \"Rocket Arena\", \"Weapons Factory\", \"Loki's Minions Capture the Flag\", and \"RailwarZ Insta-Gib Capture the Flag\".\n\nDespite the title, \"Quake II\" is a sequel to the original \"Quake\" in name only. The scenario, enemies, and theme are entirely separate and do not fall into the same continuity as \"Quake\". id initially wanted to set it separately from \"Quake\", but due to legal reasons (most of their suggested names were already taken), they decided to use the working title. \"Quake II\" was also adopted as a name to leverage the popularity of \"Quake\". \"Quake II\" has been released on Steam, but this version does not include the soundtrack. The game was released on a bonus disc included with \"Quake 4\" Special Edition for the PC, along with both expansion packs. This version also lacks the soundtrack. \"Quake II\" is also available on a bonus disc with the Xbox 360 version of \"Quake 4\". This version is a direct port featuring the original soundtrack and multiplayer maps.\n\n\"Quake II Mission Pack: The Reckoning\" was the first official mission pack, released on May 31, 1998. It was developed by Xatrix Entertainment. It features eighteen new single player levels, six new deathmatch levels, three new weapons (the Ion Ripper, Phalanx Particle Cannon, and Trap), a new power-up, two new enemies, seven modified versions of existing enemies, and five new music tracks. The storyline follows Joker, a member of an elite squad of marines on a mission to infiltrate the Moon Base and destroy the Strogg fleet, which is preparing to attack. Joker crash lands in the swamps outside of the compound where his squad is waiting. Joker travels through the swamps and bypasses the compounds outer defenses and enters through the main gate. Joker finds his squad just in time to watch them get executed by Strogg forces. Joker escapes on his own to the fuel refinery where he helps the Air Force destroy all fuel production. Afterwards, Joker infiltrates the Strogg spaceport, boards a cargo ship and reaches the Moon Base, destroying it and the Strogg fleet.\n\n\"Quake II Mission Pack: Ground Zero\" was the second official mission pack, released on August 31, 1998. It was developed by Rogue Entertainment. It features fourteen new single player levels, ten new deathmatch levels, five new weapons (the Chainsaw, Explosive-Tipped Flechette Rifle, Plasma Beam, Proximity Mine Launcher, and Tesla Mine), seven new power-ups, five new enemies, and five new music tracks. The Gravity Well has trapped the Earth fleet in orbit above the planet. The storyline follows Stepchild, one of the marines who managed to land, who must now make his way to the Gravity Well to destroy it, free the fleet above, and disable the defenses of the entire planet.\n\n\"Quake II Netpack I: Extremities\" contains, among other features, 11 game mods and 12 deathmatch maps.\n\n\"Quake II\" is included in a number of official compilations:\n\n\n\"Quake II\" received positive reviews. Aggregating review website GameRankings gave the PC version 87.31%, the Nintendo 64 version 81.27%, and the PlayStation version 79.81%. AllGame editor Michael L. House praised Quake II by stating \"the beauty of Quake II is not in the single-player game, it's in the multi-player feature\". Gamespot editor Vince Broady described Quake II as \"the only first-person shooter to render the original Quake entirely obsolete\".\n\n\"Quake II\" won \"Computer Gaming World\"s 1997 \"Action Game of the Year\" award. The editors wrote that \"for pure adrenaline-pumping, visceral, instantly gratifying action, \"Quake II\" is the hands-down winner. No game gave us the rush that \"Quake II\" did.\"\n\n"}
{"id": "25217", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25217", "title": "Qi", "text": "Qi\n\nIn traditional Chinese culture, qì or ch'i (, also known as khí in Vietnamese culture, gi in Korean culture, ki in Japanese culture) is believed to be a vital force forming part of any living thing. \"Qi\" literally translates as \"breath,\" \"air,\" or \"gas,\" and figuratively as \"material energy,\" \"life force,\" or \"energy flow\". \"Qi\" is the central underlying principle in traditional Chinese medicine and Chinese martial arts.\n\nDespite widespread belief in the reality of \"qi,\" it is a non-scientific, unverifiable concept.\n\nThis cultural keyword \"qì\" is analyzable in terms of Chinese and Sino-Xenic pronunciations, possible etymologies, the logographs 氣, 气, and 気, various meanings ranging from \"vapor\" to \"anger\", and the English loanword \"qi\" or \"ch'i\".\n\nThe logograph 氣 is read with two Chinese pronunciations, the usual \"qì\" 氣 \"air; vital energy\" and the rare archaic \"xì\" 氣 \"to present food\" (later disambiguated with 餼).\n\nPronunciations of 氣 in modern varieties of Chinese, from the infobox (see top right of page) with standardized IPA equivalents, include: Standard Chinese \"qì\" /t͡ɕʰi⁵¹/, Wu Chinese \"qi\" /t͡ɕʰi³⁴/, Southern Min \"khì\" /kʰi²¹/, Eastern Min \"ké\" /kʰɛi²¹³/, Standard Cantonese \"hei\" /hei̯³³/, and Hakka Chinese \"hi\" /hi⁵⁵/.\n\nPronunciations of 氣 in Sino-Xenic borrowings include: Japanese language \"ki\", Korean language \"gi\", and Vietnamese language \"khi\".\n\nReconstructions of the Middle Chinese pronunciation of 氣, standardized to IPA transcription, include: /kʰe̯i/ (Bernard Karlgren), /kʰĭəi/ (Wang Li), /kʰiəi/ (Li Rong), /kʰɨj/ (Edwin Pulleyblank), and /kʰɨi/ (Zhengzhang Shangfang).\n\nReconstructions of the Old Chinese pronunciation of 氣, standardized to IPA transcription, include: /*kʰɯds/ (Zhengzhang Shangfang), and /*C.qʰəp-s/ (William H. Baxter and Laurent Sagart).\n\nThe etymology of \"qì\" (reconstructed as Middle Chinese \"kʰjei\" and Old Chinese \"*kə(t)s\") 氣 \"air; breath; vapor; vital principle\", as well as its cognate \"kài\" (MC \"kʰâi\" and OC \"*khə̂(t)s\") 愾 \"sigh; angry\", interconnects with Kharia \"kʰis\" \"anger\", Sora \"kissa\" \"move with great effort\", Khmer \"kʰɛs\" \"strive after; endeavor\", and Gyalrongic \"kʰɐs\" \"anger\".\n\nIn East Asian languages, Chinese \"qì\" \"air; breath\" has three logographs: 氣 is the traditional Chinese character, Korean \"hanja\", and Japanese \"kyūjitai\" \"old character form\" \"kanji\"; 気 is the Japanese \"shinjitai\" \"new character form\" \"kanji\", and 气 is the simplified Chinese character. In addition, \"qì\" 炁 is an uncommon character especially used in writing Daoist talismans. Historically, the word \"qì\" was generally written as 气 until the Han dynasty (206 BCE–220 CE), when it was replaced by the 氣 graph clarified with \"mǐ\" 米 \"rice\" indicating \"steam (rising from rice as it cooks)\".\n\nThis primary graph 气 corresponds to the earliest written characters for \"qì\", which consisted of three wavy horizontal lines seen in Shang dynasty (c. 1600–1046 BCE) oracle bone script, Zhou dynasty (1046–256 BCE) bronzeware script and large seal script, and Qin dynasty (221–206 BCE) small seal script. These oracle, bronze, and seal scripts graphs for \"qì\" 气 \"air; breath; etc.\" were anciently used as a phonetic loan character to write \"qǐ\" 乞 \"plead for; beg; ask\", which did not have an early character.\n\nThe vast majority of Chinese characters are classified as radical-phonetic characters, which combine a semantically suggestive \"radical\" or \"signific\" with a \"phonetic\" element approximating ancient pronunciation. For example, the widely known word \"dào\" 道 \"the Dao; the way\" graphically combines the \"walk\" radical 辶 with a \"shǒu\" 首 \"head\" phonetic—although the modern \"dào\" and \"shǒu\" pronunciations are dissimilar, the Old Chinese \"*lˤuʔ-s\" 道 and \"*l̥uʔ-s\" 首 were alike. The regular script character \"qì\" 氣 is unusual because \"qì\" 气 is both the \"air radical\" and the phonetic, with \"mǐ\" 米 \"rice\" semantically indicating \"steam; vapor\".\n\nThis \"qì\" 气 \"air/gas radical\", which was only used in a few native Chinese characters like \"yīnyūn\" 氤氲 \"thick mist/smoke\", was used to create new scientific characters for gaseous chemical elements. Some examples are based on pronunciations in European languages: \"fú\" 氟 (with a \"fú\" 弗 phonetic) \"fluorine\" and \"nǎi\" 氖 (with a \"nǎi\" 乃 phonetic) \"neon\"; others are based on semantics: \"qīng\" 氫 (with a \"jīng\" 巠 phonetic, abbreviating \"qīng\" 輕 \"light-weight\") \"hydrogen (the lightest element)\" and \"lǜ\" 氯 (with a \"lù\" 彔 phonetic, abbreviating \"lǜ\" 綠 \"green\") \"(greenish-yellow) chlorine\".\n\n\"Qì\" 氣 is the phonetic element in a few characters such as \"kài\" 愾 \"hate\" with the \"heart-mind radical\" 忄or 心, \"xì\" 熂 \"set fire to weeds\" with the \"fire radical\" 火, and \"xì\" 餼 \"to present food\" with the \"food radical\" 食.\n\nThe first Chinese dictionary of characters, the (121 CE) \"Shuowen Jiezi\" notes that the primary \"qì\" 气 is a pictographic character depicting 雲气 \"cloudy vapors\", and that the full 氣 combines 米 \"rice\" with the phonetic \"qi\" 气, meaning 饋客芻米 \"present provisions to guests\" (later disambiguated as \"xì\" 餼).\n\n\"Qi\" is a polysemous word - the unabridged Chinese-Chinese character dictionary \"Hanyu Da Zidian\" lists one meaning, \"present food or provisions,\" for the \"xì\" pronunciation, and 23 meanings for the \"qì\" pronunciation. The modern \"ABC Chinese-English Comprehensive Dictionary,\" which enters \"xì\" 餼 \"grain; animal feed; make a present of food,\" but not classical \"xì\" 氣, has a \"qì\" 氣 entry giving seven translation equivalents for the noun, two for bound morphemes, and three for the verb.\nn. ① air; gas ② smell ③ spirit; vigor; morale ④ vital/material energy (in Ch[inese] metaphysics) ⑤ tone; atmosphere; attitude ⑥ anger ⑦ breath; respiration b.f. ① weather 天氣 \"tiānqì\" ② [linguistics] aspiration 送氣 \"sòngqì\" v. ① anger ② get angry ③ bully; insult.\n\n\"Qi\" was an early Chinese loanword in English, romanized as: \"k'i\" in Church Romanization in the early-19th century, \"ch'i\" in Wade–Giles in the mid-19th century (sometimes misspelled \"chi\" omitting the apostrophe indicating aspirated consonant stops, e.g., spelling the martial art \"ch'i kung\" as \"\"chi kung\"\"), and \"qi\" in Pinyin in the mid-20th century. The \"Oxford English Dictionary\" entry for \"qi\" gives the pronunciation as IPA (tʃi), the etymology from Chinese \"qì\" \"air; breath\", and a definition of \"The physical life-force postulated by certain Chinese philosophers; the material principle.\" The \"OED\" gives eight usage examples, with the first recorded example of \"k'í\" in 1850 (\"The Chinese Repository\"), of \"ch'i\" in 1917 (\"The Encyclopaedia Sinica\"), and \"qi\" in 1971 (Felix Mann's \"Acupuncture\")\n\nReferences to concepts analogous to the \"qi\" taken to be the life-process or flow of energy that sustains living beings are found in many belief systems, especially in Asia. Philosophical conceptions of \"qi\" from the earliest records of Chinese philosophy (5th century BCE) correspond to Western notions of humours, the ancient Hindu yogic concept of \"prana\" (\"life force\" in Sanskrit) and traditional Jewish sources refer to as the Nefesh level of soul within the body. An early form of the idea comes from the writings of the Chinese philosopher Mencius (4th century BCE). Historically, the \"Huangdi Neijing\"/\"\"The Yellow Emperor's Classic of Medicine\"\" (circa 2nd century BCE) is credited with first establishing the pathways through which \"qi\" circulates in the human body.\n\nThe ancient Chinese described it as \"life force\". They believed \"qi\" permeated everything and linked their surroundings together. They likened it to the flow of energy around and through the body, forming a cohesive and functioning unit. By understanding its rhythm and flow they believed they could guide exercises and treatments to provide stability and longevity.\n\nAlthough the concept of \"qi\" has been important within many Chinese philosophies, over the centuries the descriptions of \"qi\" have varied and have sometimes been in conflict. Until China came into contact with Western scientific and philosophical ideas, they had not categorized all things in terms of matter and energy. \"Qi\" and \"li\" (理: \"pattern\") were 'fundamental' categories similar to matter and energy.\n\nFairly early on, some Chinese thinkers began to believe that there were different fractions of \"qi\" and that the coarsest and heaviest fractions of \"qi\" formed solids, lighter fractions formed liquids, and the most ethereal fractions were the \"lifebreath\" that animates living beings.\n\n\"Yuán qì\" is a notion of innate or pre-natal \"qi\" to distinguish it from acquired \"qi\" that a person may develop over the course of their lifetime.\n\nThe earliest texts that speak of \"qi\" give some indications of how the concept developed.In the Analects of Confucius \"qi\" could mean \"breath\", and combining it with the Chinese word for blood (making 血氣, \"xue\"–\"qi\", blood and breath), the concept could be used to account for motivational characteristics.\n\nThe philosopher Mozi used the word \"qi\" to refer to noxious vapors that would in due time arise from a corpse were it not buried at a sufficient depth. He reported that early civilized humans learned how to live in houses to protect their \"qi\" from the moisture that had troubled them when they lived in caves. He also associated maintaining one's \"qi\" with providing oneself adequate nutrition. In regard to another kind of \"qi\", he recorded how some people performed a kind of prognostication by observing the \"qi\" (clouds) in the sky.\n\nMencius described a kind of \"qi\" that might be characterized as an individual's vital energies. This \"qi\" was necessary to activity and it could be controlled by a well-integrated willpower. When properly nurtured, this \"qi\" was said to be capable of extending beyond the human body to reach throughout the universe. It could also be augmented by means of careful exercise of one's moral capacities. On the other hand, the \"qi\" of an individual could be degraded by adverse external forces that succeed in operating on that individual.\n\nNot only human beings and animals were believed to have \"qi\". Zhuangzi indicated that wind is the \"qi\" of the Earth. Moreover, cosmic yin and yang \"are the greatest of \"qi\".\" He described \"qi\" as \"issuing forth\" and creating profound effects. He said \"Human beings are born [because of] the accumulation of \"qi\". When it accumulates there is life. When it dissipates there is death... There is one \"qi\" that connects and pervades everything in the world.\"\n\nAnother passage traces life to intercourse between Heaven and Earth: \"The highest Yin is the most restrained. The highest Yang is the most exuberant. The restrained comes forth from Heaven. The exuberant issues forth from Earth. The two intertwine and penetrate forming a harmony, and [as a result] things are born.\"\n\n\"The Guanzi essay Neiye 內業 (Inward training) is the oldest received writing on the subject of the cultivation of vapor \"[qi]\" and meditation techniques. The essay was probably composed at the Jixia Academy in Qi in the late fourth century B.C.\"\n\nXun Zi, another Confucian scholar of the Jixia Academy, followed in later years. At 9:69/127, Xun Zi says, \"Fire and water have \"qi\" but do not have life. Grasses and trees have life but do not have perceptivity. Fowl and beasts have perceptivity but do not have \"yi\" (sense of right and wrong, duty, justice). Men have \"qi\", life, perceptivity, and \"yi\".\" Chinese people at such an early time had no concept of radiant energy, but they were aware that one can be heated by a campfire from a distance away from the fire. They accounted for this phenomenon by claiming \"\"qi\"\" radiated from fire. At 18:62/122, he also uses \"\"qi\"\" to refer to the vital forces of the body that decline with advanced age.\n\nAmong the animals, the gibbon and the crane were considered experts at inhaling the \"qi\". The Confucian scholar Dong Zhongshu (ca. 150 BC) wrote in Luxuriant Dew of the Spring and Autumn Annals: \"The gibbon resembles a macaque, but he is larger, and his color is black. His forearms being long, he lives eight hundred years, because he is expert in controlling his breathing.\" (\"猿似猴。大而黑。長前臂。所以壽八百。好引氣也。\")\n\nLater, the syncretic text assembled under the direction of Liu An, the Huai Nan Zi, or \"Masters of Huainan\", has a passage that presages most of what is given greater detail by the Neo-Confucians:\n\nTraditional Chinese medicine (TCM) asserts that the body has natural patterns of \"qi\" that circulate in channels called meridians.\n\nIn TCM, symptoms of various illnesses are believed to be the product of disrupted, blocked, or unbalanced \"qi\" movement through the body's meridians, as well as deficiencies or imbalances of \"qi\" in the \"Zang Fu\" organs. Traditional Chinese medicine often seeks to relieve these imbalances by adjusting the circulation of \"qi\" using a variety of techniques including herbology, food therapy, physical training regimens (qigong, t'ai chi ch'uan, and other martial arts training), moxibustion, \"tui na\", and acupuncture.\n\nA \"qi\" field (\"chu-chong\") refers to the cultivation of an energy field by a group, typically for healing or other benevolent purposes. A \"qi\" field is believed to be produced by visualization and affirmation, and is an important component of Wisdom Healing \"Qigong\" (\"Zhineng Qigong\"), founded by Grandmaster Ming Pang.\n\nConcepts similar to \"qi\" can be found in many cultures.\n\n\"prana\" in Hinduism (and elsewhere in Indian culture), \"chi\" in the Igbo religion, \"pneuma\" in ancient Greece, \"mana\" in Hawaiian culture, \"lüng\" in Tibetan Buddhism, \"manitou\" in the culture of the indigenous peoples of the Americas, \"ruah\" in Jewish culture, and vital energy in Western philosophy.\n\nSome elements of the concept of \"qi\" can be found in the term energy when used in the context of various esoteric forms of spirituality and alternative medicine.\n\nNotions in the West of \"energeia\", \"élan vital\", or vitalism are purported to be similar.\n\nElements of the concept can also be found in Western popular culture, for example \"The Force\" in \"Star Wars\" and the related Jediism, a religion based on the Jedi and even in Eastern popular culture like \"Dragon Ball\" and \"One-Punch Man\".\n\nQi is a non-scientific, unverifiable concept.\n\nA United States National Institutes of Health consensus statement on acupuncture in 1997 noted that concepts such as \"qi\" \"are difficult to reconcile with contemporary biomedical information.\"\n\nThe April 22, 2014, Skeptoid podcast episode titled \"Your Body's Alleged Energy Fields\" relates a Reiki practitioner's report of what was happening as she passed her hands over a subject's body:\n\nEvaluating these claims scientific skeptic author Brian Dunning reported:\n\nThe traditional Chinese art of geomancy, the placement and arrangement of space called feng shui, is based on calculating the balance of \"qi\", interactions between the five elements, yin and yang, and other factors. The retention or dissipation of \"qi\" is believed to affect the health, wealth, energy level, luck and many other aspects of the occupants of the space. Attributes of each item in a space affect the flow of \"qi\" by slowing it down, redirecting it or accelerating it, which is said to influence the energy level of the occupants.\n\nOne use for a \"luopan\" is to detect the flow of \"qi\". The quality of \"qi\" may rise and fall over time, feng shui with a compass might be considered a form of divination that assesses the quality of the local environment.\n\n\"Qìgōng\" (气功 or 氣功) is a practice involving coordinated breathing, movement, and awareness, traditionally viewed as a practice to cultivate and balance \"qi\". With roots in traditional Chinese medicine, philosophy, and martial arts, \"qigong\" is now practiced worldwide for exercise, healing, meditation, and training for martial arts. Typically a \"qigong\" practice involves rhythmic breathing coordinated with slow stylized movement, a calm mindful state, and visualization of guiding \"qi\".\n\n\"Qi\" is a didactic concept in many Chinese, Korean and Japanese martial arts. Martial \"qigong\" is a feature of both internal and external training systems in China and other East Asian cultures. The most notable of the \"qi\"-focused \"internal\" force (jin) martial arts are Baguazhang, Xing Yi Quan, T'ai Chi Ch'uan, Southern Praying Mantis, Snake Kung Fu, Southern Dragon Kung Fu, Aikido, Kendo, Aikijujutsu, Luohan Quan and Liu He Ba Fa.\n\nDemonstrations of \"qi\" or \"ki\" are popular in some martial arts and may include the immovable body, the unraisable body, the unbendable arm, and other feats of power. Some of these feats can alternatively be explained using biomechanics and physics.\n\nAcupuncture is a part of traditional Chinese medicine that involves insertion of needles into superficial structures of the body (skin, subcutaneous tissue, muscles) at acupuncture points to balance the flow of \"qi\". Acupuncture is often accompanied by moxibustion, a treatment that involves burning mugwort on or near the skin at an acupuncture point.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "25219", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25219", "title": "Quanta", "text": "Quanta\n\nQuanta is the plural of quantum.\n\nQuanta may also refer to:\n\n"}
{"id": "25220", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25220", "title": "Quantum computing", "text": "Quantum computing\n\nQuantum computing studies theoretical computation systems (quantum computers) that make direct use of quantum-mechanical phenomena, such as superposition and entanglement, to perform operations on data. Quantum computers are different from binary digital electronic computers based on transistors. Whereas common digital computing requires that the data be encoded into binary digits (bits), each of which is always in one of two definite states (0 or 1), quantum computation uses quantum bits, which can be in superpositions of states. A quantum Turing machine is a theoretical model of such a computer, and is also known as the universal quantum computer. The field of quantum computing was initiated by the work of Paul Benioff and Yuri Manin in 1980, Richard Feynman in 1982, and David Deutsch in 1985. A quantum computer with spins as quantum bits was also formulated for use as a quantum spacetime in 1968.\n\n, the development of actual quantum computers is still in its infancy, but experiments have been carried out in which quantum computational operations were executed on a very small number of quantum bits. Both practical and theoretical research continues, and many national governments and military agencies are funding quantum computing research in an effort to develop quantum computers for civilian, business, trade, environmental and national security purposes, such as cryptanalysis.\n\nLarge-scale quantum computers would theoretically be able to solve certain problems much more quickly than any classical computers that use even the best currently known algorithms, like integer factorization using Shor's algorithm or the simulation of quantum many-body systems. There exist quantum algorithms, such as Simon's algorithm, that run faster than any possible probabilistic classical algorithm.\nA classical computer could in principle (with exponential resources) simulate a quantum algorithm, as quantum computation does not violate the Church–Turing thesis. On the other hand, quantum computers may be able to efficiently solve problems which are not \"practically\" feasible on classical computers.\n\nA classical computer has a memory made up of bits, where each bit is represented by either a one or a zero. A quantum computer maintains a sequence of qubits. A single qubit can represent a one, a zero, or any quantum superposition of those two qubit states; a pair of qubits can be in any quantum superposition of 4 states, and three qubits in any superposition of 8 states. In general, a quantum computer with formula_1 qubits can be in an arbitrary superposition of up to formula_2 different states simultaneously (this compares to a normal computer that can only be in \"one\" of these formula_2 states at any one time). A quantum computer operates on its qubits using quantum gates and measurement (which also alters the observed state). An algorithm is composed of a fixed sequence of quantum logic gates and a problem is encoded by setting the initial values of the qubits, similar to how a classical computer works. The calculation usually ends with a measurement, collapsing the system of qubits into one of the formula_2 pure states, where each qubit is zero or one, decomposing into a classical state. The outcome can therefore be at most formula_1 classical bits of information. Quantum algorithms are often probabilistic, in that they provide the correct solution only with a certain known probability. Note that the term non-deterministic computing must not be used in that case to mean probabilistic (computing), because the term non-deterministic has a different meaning in computer science.\n\nAn example of an implementation of qubits of a quantum computer could start with the use of particles with two spin states: \"down\" and \"up\" (typically written formula_6 and formula_7, or formula_8 and formula_9). This is true because any such system can be mapped onto an effective spin-1/2 system.\n\nA quantum computer with a given number of qubits is fundamentally different from a classical computer composed of the same number of classical bits. For example, representing the state of an \"n\"-qubit system on a classical computer requires the storage of 2 complex coefficients, while to characterize the state of a classical \"n\"-bit system it is sufficient to provide the values of the \"n\" bits, that is, only \"n\" numbers. Although this fact may seem to indicate that qubits can hold exponentially more information than their classical counterparts, care must be taken not to overlook the fact that the qubits are only in a probabilistic superposition of all of their states. This means that when the final state of the qubits is measured, they will only be found in one of the possible configurations they were in before the measurement. It is generally incorrect to think of a system of qubits as being in one particular state before the measurement, since the fact that they were in a superposition of states before the measurement was made directly affects the possible outcomes of the computation.\n\nTo better understand this point, consider a classical computer that operates on a three-bit register. If the exact state of the register at a given time is not known, it can be described as a probability distribution over the formula_10 different three-bit strings 000, 001, 010, 011, 100, 101, 110, and 111. If there is no uncertainty over its state, then it is in exactly one of these states with probability 1. However, if it is a probabilistic computer, then there is a possibility of it being in any \"one\" of a number of different states.\n\nThe state of a three-qubit quantum computer is similarly described by an eight-dimensional vector formula_11 (or a one dimensional vector with\neach vector node holding the amplitude and the state as the bit string of qubits). Here, however, the coefficients formula_12 are complex numbers, and it is the sum of the \"squares\" of the coefficients' absolute values, formula_13, that must equal 1. For each formula_14, the absolute value squared formula_15 gives the probability of the system being found after a measurement in the formula_14-th state. However, because a complex number encodes not just a magnitude but also a direction in the complex plane, the phase difference between any two coefficients (states) represents a meaningful parameter. This is a fundamental difference between quantum computing and probabilistic classical computing.\n\nIf you measure the three qubits, you will observe a three-bit string. The probability of measuring a given string is the squared magnitude of that string's coefficient (i.e., the probability of measuring 000 = formula_17, the probability of measuring 001 = formula_18, etc.). Thus, measuring a quantum state described by complex coefficients formula_11 gives the classical probability distribution formula_20 and we say that the quantum state \"collapses\" to a classical state as a result of making the measurement.\n\nAn eight-dimensional vector can be specified in many different ways depending on what basis is chosen for the space. The basis of bit strings (e.g., 000, 001, …, 111) is known as the computational basis. Other possible bases are unit-length, orthogonal vectors and the eigenvectors of the Pauli-x operator. Ket notation is often used to make the choice of basis explicit. For example, the state formula_11 in the computational basis can be written as:\n\nThe computational basis for a single qubit (two dimensions) is formula_24 and formula_25.\n\nUsing the eigenvectors of the Pauli-x operator, a single qubit is formula_26 and formula_27.\n\nWhile a classical 3-bit state and a quantum 3-qubit state are each eight-dimensional vectors, they are manipulated quite differently for classical or quantum computation. For computing in either case, the system must be initialized, for example into the all-zeros string, formula_28, corresponding to the vector (1,0,0,0,0,0,0,0). In classical randomized computation, the system evolves according to the application of stochastic matrices, which preserve that the probabilities add up to one (i.e., preserve the L1 norm). In quantum computation, on the other hand, allowed operations are unitary matrices, which are effectively rotations (they preserve that the sum of the squares add up to one, the Euclidean or L2 norm). (Exactly what unitaries can be applied depend on the physics of the quantum device.) Consequently, since rotations can be undone by rotating backward, quantum computations are reversible. (Technically, quantum operations can be probabilistic combinations of unitaries, so quantum computation really does generalize classical computation. See quantum circuit for a more precise formulation.)\n\nFinally, upon termination of the algorithm, the result needs to be read off. In the case of a classical computer, we \"sample\" from the probability distribution on the three-bit register to obtain one definite three-bit string, say 000. Quantum mechanically, we \"measure\" the three-qubit state, which is equivalent to collapsing the quantum state down to a classical distribution (with the coefficients in the classical state being the squared magnitudes of the coefficients for the quantum state, as described above), followed by sampling from that distribution. This destroys the original quantum state. Many algorithms will only give the correct answer with a certain probability. However, by repeatedly initializing, running and measuring the quantum computer's results, the probability of getting the correct answer can be increased. In contrast, counterfactual quantum computation allows the correct answer to be inferred when the quantum computer is not actually running in a technical sense, though earlier initialization and frequent measurements are part of the counterfactual computation protocol.\n\nFor more details on the sequences of operations used for various quantum algorithms, see universal quantum computer, Shor's algorithm, Grover's algorithm, Deutsch–Jozsa algorithm, amplitude amplification, quantum Fourier transform, quantum gate, quantum adiabatic algorithm and quantum error correction.\n\nInteger factorization, which underpins the security of public key cryptographic systems, is believed to be computationally infeasible with an ordinary computer for large integers if they are the product of few prime numbers (e.g., products of two 300-digit primes). By comparison, a quantum computer could efficiently solve this problem using Shor's algorithm to find its factors. This ability would allow a quantum computer to decrypt many of the cryptographic systems in use today, in the sense that there would be a polynomial time (in the number of digits of the integer) algorithm for solving the problem. In particular, most of the popular public key ciphers are based on the difficulty of factoring integers or the discrete logarithm problem, both of which can be solved by Shor's algorithm. In particular the RSA, Diffie-Hellman, and Elliptic curve Diffie-Hellman algorithms could be broken. These are used to protect secure Web pages, encrypted email, and many other types of data. Breaking these would have significant ramifications for electronic privacy and security.\n\nHowever, other cryptographic algorithms do not appear to be broken by those algorithms. Some public-key algorithms are based on problems other than the integer factorization and discrete logarithm problems to which Shor's algorithm applies, like the McEliece cryptosystem based on a problem in coding theory. Lattice-based cryptosystems are also not known to be broken by quantum computers, and finding a polynomial time algorithm for solving the dihedral hidden subgroup problem, which would break many lattice based cryptosystems, is a well-studied open problem. It has been proven that applying Grover's algorithm to break a symmetric (secret key) algorithm by brute force requires time equal to roughly 2 invocations of the underlying cryptographic algorithm, compared with roughly 2 in the classical case, meaning that symmetric key lengths are effectively halved: AES-256 would have the same security against an attack using Grover's algorithm that AES-128 has against classical brute-force search (see Key size). Quantum cryptography could potentially fulfill some of the functions of public key cryptography.\n\nBesides factorization and discrete logarithms, quantum algorithms offering a more than polynomial speedup over the best known classical algorithm have been found for several problems, including the simulation of quantum physical processes from chemistry and solid state physics, the approximation of Jones polynomials, and solving Pell's equation. No mathematical proof has been found that shows that an equally fast classical algorithm cannot be discovered, although this is considered unlikely. For some problems, quantum computers offer a polynomial speedup. The most well-known example of this is \"quantum database search\", which can be solved by Grover's algorithm using quadratically fewer queries to the database than are required by classical algorithms. In this case the advantage is provable. Several other examples of provable quantum speedups for query problems have subsequently been discovered, such as for finding collisions in two-to-one functions and evaluating NAND trees.\n\nConsider a problem that has these four properties:\nAn example of this is a password cracker that attempts to guess the password for an encrypted file (assuming that the password has a maximum possible length).\n\nFor problems with all four properties, the time for a quantum computer to solve this will be proportional to the square root of the number of inputs. It can be used to attack symmetric ciphers such as Triple DES and AES by attempting to guess the secret key.\n\nGrover's algorithm can also be used to obtain a quadratic speed-up over a brute-force search for a class of problems known as NP-complete.\n\nSince chemistry and nanotechnology rely on understanding quantum systems, and such systems are impossible to simulate in an efficient manner classically, many believe quantum simulation will be one of the most important applications of quantum computing. Quantum simulation could also be used to simulate the behavior of atoms and particles at unusual conditions such as the reactions inside a collider.\n\nThere are a number of technical challenges in building a large-scale quantum computer, and thus far quantum computers have yet to solve a problem faster than a classical computer. David DiVincenzo, of IBM, listed the following requirements for a practical quantum computer:\n\nJohn Preskill has introduced the term \"quantum supremacy\" to refer to the hypothetical speedup advantage that a quantum computer would have over a classical computer. Google has announced that it expects to achieve quantum supremacy by the end of 2017, and IBM says that the best classical computers will be beaten on some task within about five years. Quantum supremacy has not been achieved yet, and some skeptics doubt that it will ever be.\n\nThere are technological hurdles preventing the effectiveness or progression of quantum computing. DiVincenzo's criteria proposes the requirements that must be met in order to successfully implement quantum algorithms.\n\nOne of the greatest challenges is controlling or removing quantum decoherence. This usually means isolating the system from its environment as interactions with the external world cause the system to decohere. However, other sources of decoherence also exist. Examples include the quantum gates, and the lattice vibrations and background thermonuclear spin of the physical system used to implement the qubits. Decoherence is irreversible, as it is effectively non-unitary, and is usually something that should be highly controlled, if not avoided. Decoherence times for candidate systems, in particular the transverse relaxation time \"T\" (for NMR and MRI technology, also called the \"dephasing time\"), typically range between nanoseconds and seconds at low temperature. Currently, some quantum computers require their qubits to be cooled to 20 millikelvins in order to prevent significant decoherence.\n\nThese issues are more difficult for optical approaches as the timescales are orders of magnitude shorter and an often-cited approach to overcoming them is optical pulse shaping. Error rates are typically proportional to the ratio of operating time to decoherence time, hence any operation must be completed much more quickly than the decoherence time.\n\nIf the error rate is small enough, it is thought to be possible to use quantum error correction, which corrects errors due to decoherence, thereby allowing the total calculation time to be longer than the decoherence time. An often cited figure for required error rate in each gate is 10. This implies that each gate must be able to perform its task in one 10,000th of the coherence time of the system.\n\nMeeting this scalability condition is possible for a wide range of systems. However, the use of error correction brings with it the cost of a greatly increased number of required bits. The number required to factor integers using Shor's algorithm is still polynomial, and thought to be between \"L\" and \"L\", where \"L\" is the number of bits in the number to be factored; error correction algorithms would inflate this figure by an additional factor of \"L\". For a 1000-bit number, this implies a need for about 10 bits without error correction. With error correction, the figure would rise to about 10 bits. Computation time is about \"L\" or about 10 steps and at 1 MHz, about 10 seconds.\n\nA very different approach to the stability-decoherence problem is to create a topological quantum computer with anyons, quasi-particles used as threads and relying on braid theory to form stable logic gates.\n\nThere are a number of quantum computing models, distinguished by the basic elements in which the computation is decomposed. The four main models of practical importance are:\nThe \"Quantum Turing machine\" is theoretically important but direct implementation of this model is not pursued. All four models of computation have been shown to be equivalent; each can simulate the other with no more than polynomial overhead.\n\nFor physically implementing a quantum computer, many different candidates are being pursued, among them (distinguished by the physical system used to realize the qubits):\n\n\nThe large number of candidates demonstrates that the topic, in spite of rapid progress, is still in its infancy. There is also a vast amount of flexibility.\n\nIn 1981, at a conference co-organized by MIT and IBM, physicist Richard Feynman urged the world to build a quantum computer. He said \"Nature isn't classical, dammit, and if you want to make a simulation of nature, you'd better make it quantum mechanical, and by golly it's a wonderful problem, because it doesn't look so easy.\"\n\nIn 1984, BB84 is published, the world's first quantum cryptography protocol by IBM scientists Charles Bennett and Gilles Brassard.\n\nIn 1993, an international group of six scientists, including Charles Bennett, confirmed the intuitions of the majority of science fiction writers by showing that perfect quantum teleportation is indeed possible in principle, but only if the original is destroyed.\n\nIn 1996, The DiVincenzo's criteria is published which is a list of conditions that are necessary for constructing a quantum computer proposed by the theoretical physicist David P. DiVincenzo in his 2000 paper \"The Physical Implementation of Quantum Computation\".\n\nIn 2001, researchers demonstrated Shor's algorithm to factor 15 using a 7-qubit NMR computer.\n\nIn 2005, researchers at the University of Michigan built a semiconductor chip ion trap. Such devices from standard lithography, may point the way to scalable quantum computing.\n\nIn 2009, researchers at Yale University created the first solid-state quantum processor. The two-qubit superconducting chip had artificial atom qubits made of a billion aluminum atoms that acted like a single atom that could occupy two states.\n\nA team at the University of Bristol, also created a silicon chip based on quantum optics, able to run Shor's algorithm.\nFurther developments were made in 2010.\nSpringer publishes a journal (\"Quantum Information Processing\") devoted to the subject.\n\nIn February 2010, Digital Combinational Circuits like adder, subtractor etc. are designed with the help of Symmetric Functions organized from different quantum gates.\n\nApril 2011, a team of scientists from Australia and Japan made a breakthrough in quantum teleportation. They successfully transferred a complex set of quantum data with full transmission integrity, without affecting the qubits' superpositions.\n\nIn 2011, D-Wave Systems announced the first commercial quantum annealer, the D-Wave One, claiming a 128 qubit processor. On May 25, 2011 Lockheed Martin agreed to purchase a D-Wave One system. Lockheed and the University of Southern California (USC) will house the D-Wave One at the newly formed USC Lockheed Martin Quantum Computing Center. D-Wave's engineers designed the chips with an empirical approach, focusing on solving particular problems. Investors liked this more than academics, who said D-Wave had not demonstrated they really had a quantum computer. Criticism softened after a D-Wave paper in Nature, that proved the chips have some quantum properties. Two published papers have suggested that the D-Wave machine's operation can be explained classically, rather than requiring quantum models. Later work showed that classical models are insufficient when all available data is considered. Experts remain divided on the ultimate classification of the D-Wave systems though their quantum behavior was established concretely with a demonstration of entanglement.\n\nDuring the same year, researchers at the University of Bristol created an all-bulk optics system that ran a version of Shor's algorithm to successfully factor 21.\n\nIn September 2011 researchers proved quantum computers can be made with a Von Neumann architecture (separation of RAM).\n\nIn November 2011 researchers factorized 143 using 4 qubits.\n\nIn February 2012 IBM scientists said that they had made several breakthroughs in quantum computing with superconducting integrated circuits.\n\nIn April 2012 a multinational team of researchers from the University of Southern California, Delft University of Technology, the Iowa State University of Science and Technology, and the University of California, Santa Barbara, constructed a two-qubit quantum computer on a doped diamond crystal that can easily be scaled up and is functional at room temperature. Two logical qubit directions of electron spin and nitrogen kernels spin were used, with microwave impulses. This computer ran Grover's algorithm generating the right answer from the first try in 95% of cases.\n\nIn September 2012, Australian researchers at the University of New South Wales said the world's first quantum computer was just 5 to 10 years away, after announcing a global breakthrough enabling manufacture of its memory building blocks. A research team led by Australian engineers created the first working qubit based on a single atom in silicon, invoking the same technological platform that forms the building blocks of modern-day computers.\n\nIn October 2012, Nobel Prizes were presented to David J. Wineland and Serge Haroche for their basic work on understanding the quantum world, which may help make quantum computing possible.\n\nIn November 2012, the first quantum teleportation from one macroscopic object to another was reported by scientists at the University of Science and Technology of China in Hefei.\n\nIn December 2012, the first dedicated quantum computing software company, 1QBit was founded in Vancouver, BC. 1QBit is the first company to focus exclusively on commercializing software applications for commercially available quantum computers, including the D-Wave Two. 1QBit's research demonstrated the ability of superconducting quantum annealing processors to solve real-world problems.\n\nIn February 2013, a new technique, boson sampling, was reported by two groups using photons in an optical lattice that is not a universal quantum computer but may be good enough for practical problems. \"Science\" Feb 15, 2013\n\nIn May 2013, Google announced that it was launching the Quantum Artificial Intelligence Lab, hosted by NASA Ames Research Center, with a 512-qubit D-Wave quantum computer. The USRA (Universities Space Research Association) will invite researchers to share time on it with the goal of studying quantum computing for machine learning.\n\nIn early 2014 it was reported, based on documents provided by former NSA contractor Edward Snowden, that the U.S. National Security Agency (NSA) is running a $79.7 million research program (titled \"Penetrating Hard Targets\") to develop a quantum computer capable of breaking vulnerable encryption.\n\nIn 2014, a group of researchers from ETH Zürich, USC, Google and Microsoft reported a definition of quantum speedup, and were not able to measure quantum speedup with the D-Wave Two device, but did not explicitly rule it out.\n\nIn 2014, researchers at University of New South Wales used silicon as a protectant shell around qubits, making them more accurate, increasing the length of time they will hold information and possibly made quantum computers easier to build.\n\nIn April 2015 IBM scientists claimed two critical advances towards the realization of a practical quantum computer. They claimed the ability to detect and measure both kinds of quantum errors simultaneously, as well as a new, square quantum bit circuit design that could scale to larger dimensions.\n\nIn October 2015 researchers at University of New South Wales built a quantum logic gate in silicon for the first time.\n\nIn December 2015 NASA publicly displayed the world's first fully operational $15-million quantum computer made by the Canadian company D-Wave at the Quantum Artificial Intelligence Laboratory at its Ames Research Center in California's Moffett Field. The device was purchased in 2013 via a partnership with Google and Universities Space Research Association. The presence and use of quantum effects in the D-Wave quantum processing unit is more widely accepted. In some tests it can be shown that the D-Wave quantum annealing processor outperforms Selby’s algorithm.\n\nIn May 2016, IBM Research announced that for the first time ever it is making quantum computing available to members of the public via the cloud, who can access and run experiments on IBM’s quantum processor. The service is called the IBM Quantum Experience. The quantum processor is composed of five superconducting qubits and is housed at the IBM T.J. Watson Research Center in New York.\n\nIn August 2016, scientists at the University of Maryland successfully built the first reprogrammable quantum computer.\n\nIn October 2016 Basel University described a variant of the electron hole based quantum computer, which instead of manipulating\nelectron spins uses electron holes in a semiconductor at low (mK) temperatures which are a lot less vulnerable to decoherence. \nThis has been dubbed the \"positronic\" quantum computer as the quasi-particle behaves like it has a positive electrical charge.\n\nIn March 2017, IBM announced an industry-first initiative to build commercially available universal quantum computing systems called IBM Q. The company also released a new API (Application Program Interface) for the IBM Quantum Experience that enables developers and programmers to begin building interfaces between its existing five quantum bit (qubit) cloud-based quantum computer and classical computers, without needing a deep background in quantum physics.\n\nIn May 2017, IBM announced that it has successfully built and tested its most powerful universal quantum computing processors. The first is a 16 qubit processor that will allow for more complex experimentation than the previously available 5 qubit processor. The second is an IBM's first prototype commercial processor with 17 qubits and leverages significant materials, device, and architecture improvements to make it the most powerful quantum processor created to date by IBM.\n\nIn July 2017, A group of U.S. researchers announced a quantum simulator with 51 qubits. The announcement was made by Mikhail Lukin of Harvard University at the International Conference on Quantum Technologies in Moscow. A quantum simulator differs from a computer. Lukin’s simulator was designed to solve one equation. Solving a different equation would require building a new system. A computer can solve many different equations.\n\nThe class of problems that can be efficiently solved by quantum computers is called BQP, for \"bounded error, quantum, polynomial time\". Quantum computers only run probabilistic algorithms, so BQP on quantum computers is the counterpart of BPP (\"bounded error, probabilistic, polynomial time\") on classical computers. It is defined as the set of problems solvable with a polynomial-time algorithm, whose probability of error is bounded away from one half. A quantum computer is said to \"solve\" a problem if, for every instance, its answer will be right with high probability. If that solution runs in polynomial time, then that problem is in BQP.\n\nBQP is contained in the complexity class \"#P\" (or more precisely in the associated class of decision problems \"P\"), which is a subclass of PSPACE.\n\nBQP is suspected to be disjoint from NP-complete and a strict superset of P, but that is not known. Both integer factorization and discrete log are in BQP. Both of these problems are NP problems suspected to be outside BPP, and hence outside P. Both are suspected to not be NP-complete. There is a common misconception that quantum computers can solve NP-complete problems in polynomial time. That is not known to be true, and is generally suspected to be false.\n\nThe capacity of a quantum computer to accelerate classical algorithms has rigid limits—upper bounds of quantum computation's complexity. The overwhelming part of classical calculations cannot be accelerated on a quantum computer. A similar fact takes place for particular computational tasks, like the search problem, for which Grover's algorithm is optimal.\n\nBohmian Mechanics is a non-local hidden variable interpretation of quantum mechanics. It has been shown that a non-local hidden variable quantum computer could implement a search of an N-item database at most in formula_29 steps. This is slightly faster than the formula_30 steps taken by Grover's algorithm. Neither search method will allow quantum computers to solve NP-Complete problems in polynomial time.\n\nAlthough quantum computers may be faster than classical computers for some problem types, those described above can't solve any problem that classical computers can't already solve. A Turing machine can simulate these quantum computers, so such a quantum computer could never solve an undecidable problem like the halting problem. The existence of \"standard\" quantum computers does not disprove the Church–Turing thesis. It has been speculated that theories of quantum gravity, such as M-theory or loop quantum gravity, may allow even faster computers to be built. Currently, \"defining\" computation in such theories is an open problem due to the \"problem of time\", i.e., there currently exists no obvious way to describe what it means for an observer to submit input to a computer and later receive output.\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "25222", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25222", "title": "QT", "text": "QT\n\nQT or Qt may refer to:\n\n\n\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "25223", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25223", "title": "Quasigroup", "text": "Quasigroup\n\nIn mathematics, especially in abstract algebra, a quasigroup is an algebraic structure resembling a group in the sense that \"division\" is always possible. Quasigroups differ from groups mainly in that they need not be associative.\n\nA quasigroup with an identity element is called a loop.\n\nThere are at least two structurally equivalent formal definitions of quasigroup. One defines a quasigroup as a set with one binary operation, and the other, from universal algebra, defines a quasigroup as having three primitive operations. The homomorphic image of a quasigroup defined with a single binary operation, however, need not be a quasigroup. We begin with the first definition.\n\nA quasigroup is a set, \"Q\", with a binary operation, ∗, (that is, a magma), obeying the Latin square property. This states that, for each \"a\" and \"b\" in \"Q\", there exist unique elements \"x\" and \"y\" in \"Q\" such that both\nhold. (In other words: Each element of the set occurs exactly once in each row and exactly once in each column of the quasigroup's multiplication table, or Cayley table. This property ensures that the Cayley table of a finite quasigroup is a Latin square.) The uniqueness requirement can be replaced by the requirement that the magma be cancellative.\n\nThe unique solutions to these equations are written and . The operations '\\' and '/' are called, respectively, left and right division.\n\nThe empty set equipped with the empty binary operation satisfies this definition of a quasigroup. Some authors accept the empty quasigroup but others explicitly exclude it.\n\nGiven some algebraic structure, an identity is an equation in which all variables are tacitly universally quantified, and in which all operations are among the primitive operations proper to the structure. Algebraic structures axiomatized solely by identities are called varieties. Many standard results in universal algebra hold only for varieties. Quasigroups are varieties if left and right division are taken as primitive.\n\nA quasigroup is a type (2,2,2) algebra (i.e., equipped with three binary operations) satisfying the identities:\n\nIn other words: Multiplication and division in either order, one after the other, on the same side by the same element, have no net effect.\n\nHence if is a quasigroup according to the first definition, then is the same quasigroup in the sense of universal algebra.\n\nA loop is a quasigroup with an identity element; that is, an element, \"e\", such that\n\nIt follows that the identity element, \"e\", is unique, and that every element of \"Q\" has a unique left and right inverse. Since the presence of an identity element is essential, a loop cannot be empty.\n\nA quasigroup with an idempotent element is called a pique (\"pointed idempotent quasigroup\"); this is a weaker notion than loop but common nonetheless because given an abelian group, , its subtraction operation (as quasigroup multiplication) yields a pique with the abelian group's zero/identity turned into a \"pointed idempotent\"; i.e., there's a principal isotopy .\n\nA loop that is associative is a group. A group can have a non-associative pique isotope, but it cannot\nhave a nonassociative loop isotope. There are also some weaker associativity-like properties which have been given special names.\n\nA Bol loop is a loop that satisfies either:\nfor each \"x\", \"y\" and \"z\" in \"Q\" (a \"left Bol loop\"),\n\nor else\nfor each \"x\", \"y\" and \"z\" in \"Q\" (a \"right Bol loop\").\n\nA loop that is both a left and right Bol loop is a Moufang loop. This is equivalent to any one of the following single Moufang identities holding for all \"x\", \"y\", \"z\":\n\nSmith (2007) names the following important subclasses:\n\nA quasigroup is semisymmetric if all of the following equivalent identities hold:\n\nAlthough this class may seem special, every quasigroup \"Q\" induces a semisymmetric quasigroup \"Q\"Δ on the direct product cube \"Q\" via following operation:\n\nwhere \"//\" and \"\\\\\" are the conjugate division operations; the latter formula more explicitly shows that the construction is exploiting an orbit of S.\n\nA narrower class that is a total symmetric quasigroup (sometimes abbreviated TS-quasigroup) in which all conjugates coincide as one operation: . Another way to define (the same notion of) totally symmetric quasigroup is as a semisymmetric quasigroup which additionally is commutative, i.e. .\n\nIdempotent total symmetric quasigroups are precisely (i.e. in a bijection with) Steiner triples, so such a quasigroup is also called a Steiner quasigroup, and sometimes the latter is even abbreviated as squag; the term sloop is defined similarly for a Steiner quasigroup that is also a loop. Without idempotency, total symmetric quasigroups correspond to the geometric notion of extended Steiner triple, also called Generalized Elliptic Cubic Curve (GECC).\n\nA quasigroup is called totally anti-symmetric if for all , both of the following implications hold:\n\nIt is called weakly totally anti-symmetric if only the first implication holds.\n\nThis property is required, for example, in the Damm algorithm.\n\n\nQuasigroups have the cancellation property: if , then . This follows from the uniqueness of left division of \"ab\" or \"ac\" by \"a\". Similarly, if , then .\n\nThe definition of a quasigroup can be treated as conditions on the left and right multiplication operators , defined by \n\nThe definition says that both mappings are bijections from \"Q\" to itself. A magma \"Q\" is a quasigroup precisely when all these operators, for every \"x\" in \"Q\", are bijective. The inverse mappings are left and right division, that is, \n\nIn this notation the identities among the quasigroup's multiplication and division operations (stated in the section on universal algebra) are\n\nwhere 1 denotes the identity mapping on \"Q\".\n\nThe multiplication table of a finite quasigroup is a Latin square: an table filled with \"n\" different symbols in such a way that each symbol occurs exactly once in each row and exactly once in each column.\n\nConversely, every Latin square can be taken as the multiplication table of a quasigroup in many ways: the border row (containing the column headers) and the border column (containing the row headers) can each be any permutation of the elements. See small Latin squares and quasigroups.\n\nEvery loop element has a unique left and right inverse given by\n\nA loop is said to have (\"two-sided\") \"inverses\" if formula_7 for all \"x\". In this case the inverse element is usually denoted by formula_8.\n\nThere are some stronger notions of inverses in loops which are often useful:\n\nA loop has the \"inverse property\" if it has both the left and right inverse properties. Inverse property loops also have the antiautomorphic and weak inverse properties. In fact, any loop which satisfies any two of the above four identities has the inverse property and therefore satisfies all four.\n\nAny loop which satisfies the left, right, or antiautomorphic inverse properties automatically has two-sided inverses.\n\nA quasigroup or loop homomorphism is a map between two quasigroups such that . Quasigroup homomorphisms necessarily preserve left and right division, as well as identity elements (if they exist).\n\nLet \"Q\" and \"P\" be quasigroups. A quasigroup homotopy from \"Q\" to \"P\" is a triple of maps from \"Q\" to \"P\" such that\nfor all \"x\", \"y\" in \"Q\". A quasigroup homomorphism is just a homotopy for which the three maps are equal.\n\nAn isotopy is a homotopy for which each of the three maps is a bijection. Two quasigroups are isotopic if there is an isotopy between them. In terms of Latin squares, an isotopy is given by a permutation of rows α, a permutation of columns β, and a permutation on the underlying element set γ.\n\nAn autotopy is an isotopy from a quasigroup to itself. The set of all autotopies of a quasigroup form a group with the automorphism group as a subgroup.\n\nEvery quasigroup is isotopic to a loop. If a loop is isotopic to a group, then it is isomorphic to that group and thus is itself a group. However, a quasigroup which is isotopic to a group need not be a group. For example, the quasigroup on R with multiplication given by is isotopic to the additive group , but is not itself a group. Every medial quasigroup is isotopic to an abelian group by the Bruck–Toyoda theorem.\n\nLeft and right division are examples of forming a quasigroup by permuting the variables in the defining equation. From the original operation ∗ (i.e., ) we can form five new operations: (the opposite operation), / and \\, and their opposites. That makes a total of six quasigroup operations, which are called the conjugates or parastrophes of ∗. Any two of these operations are said to be \"conjugate\" or \"parastrophic\" to each other (and to themselves).\n\nIf the set \"Q\" has two quasigroup operations, ∗ and ·, and one of them is isotopic to a conjugate of the other, the operations are said to be isostrophic to each other. There are also many other names for this relation of \"isostrophe\", e.g., paratopy.\n\nAn \"n\"-ary quasigroup is a set with an \"n\"-ary operation, with , such that the equation has a unique solution for any one variable if all the other \"n\" variables are specified arbitrarily. Polyadic or multiary means \"n\"-ary for some nonnegative integer \"n\".\n\nA 0-ary, or nullary, quasigroup is just a constant element of \"Q\". A 1-ary, or unary, quasigroup is a bijection of \"Q\" to itself. A binary, or 2-ary, quasigroup is an ordinary quasigroup.\n\nAn example of a multiary quasigroup is an iterated group operation, ; it is not necessary to use parentheses to specify the order of operations because the group is associative. One can also form a multiary quasigroup by carrying out any sequence of the same or different group or quasigroup operations, if the order of operations is specified.\n\nThere exist multiary quasigroups that cannot be represented in any of these ways. An \"n\"-ary quasigroup is irreducible if its operation cannot be factored into the composition of two operations in the following way:\nwhere and . Finite irreducible \"n\"-ary quasigroups exist for all ; see Akivis and Goldberg (2001) for details.\n\nAn \"n\"-ary quasigroup with an \"n\"-ary version of associativity is called an n-ary group.\n\nA right-quasigroup is a type (2,2) algebra satisfying both identities:\n\"y\" = (\"y\" / \"x\") ∗ \"x\";\n\"y\" = (\"y\" ∗ \"x\") / \"x\".\n\nSimilarly, a left-quasigroup is a type (2,2) algebra satisfying both identities:\n\"y\" = \"x\" ∗ (\"x\" \\ \"y\");\n\"y\" = \"x\" \\ (\"x\" ∗ \"y\").\n\nThe number of isomorphism classes of small quasigroups and loops is given here:\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "25225", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25225", "title": "Quaestor", "text": "Quaestor\n\nA (, , ) was a public official in Ancient Rome. The position served different functions depending on the period. In the Roman Kingdom, ' (quaestors with judicial powers) were appointed by the king to investigate and handle murders. In the Roman Republic, quaestors (also pluralized ') were elected officials that supervised the state treasury and conducted audits. It was the lowest ranking position in the ' (course of offices). However, this means that in the political environment of Rome, it was quite common for many aspiring politicians to take the position of quaestor as an early rung on the political ladder. In the Roman Empire, the position, which was initially replaced by the ' (prefect), reemerged during the late empire as \", a position appointed by the emperor to lead the imperial council and respond to petitioners.\n\nIn modern usage in Italy and Romania, a quaestor is a senior ranking officer on the police force. In some organizations, a quaestor is the officer that oversees its finances, similar to a treasurer in other organizations.\n\nThe earliest quaestors were ' (quaestors with judicial power), an office dating back to the Kingdom of Rome. ' were chosen to investigate capital crimes, and may have been appointed as needed rather than holding a permanent position. Ancient authors disagree on the exact manner of selection for this office as well as on its earliest institution, with some dating it to the mythical reign of Romulus.\n\nIn the Roman Republic, quaestors were elected officials who supervised the treasury and financial affairs of the state, its armies and its officers. The quaestors tasked with financial supervision were also called ', because they oversaw the ' (public treasury) in the Temple of Saturn. The earliest origins of the office is obscure, but by about 420 BC there were four quaestors elected each year by the \" (Assembly of the People). After 267 BC, the number was expanded to ten.\n\nThe office of quaestor, usually a former broad-striped tribune, was adopted as the first official post of the ' ( course of offices), the standard sequence that made up a career in public service. Once elected as quaestor, a Roman man earned the right to sit in the Senate and began progressing through the '. Quaestors were also given a ' (a bound bundle of wooden rods symbolizing a magistrate's authority and jurisdiction) and were entitled to one ' (civil servant bodyguard).\n\nEvery Roman consul, the highest elected official in the \", and every provincial governor was appointed a quaestor. Some quaestors were assigned to work in the city and others in the provinces where their responsibilities could include being recruited into the military. Some provincial quaestors were assigned as staff to military generals or served as second-in-command to governors in the Roman provinces. Still others were assigned to oversee military finances.\n\nLucius Cornelius Sulla's reforms in 81 BC raised the number of quaestors to 20 and the minimum age for a quaestorship was 30 for patricians (members of ruling class families) and 32 for plebeians (commoners). Additionally, the reforms granted quaestors automatic membership in the Senate upon being elected, whereas previously, membership in the Senate was granted only after censors revised the Senate rolls, which occurred less frequently than the annual induction of quaestors.\n\nThis relationship between a consul and a quaestor was similar to that between a patron and a client. The quaestor was essential a client to their superior. There was some level of mutual respect between the two individuals, but a defined sense of place and knowledge of each others roles. This relationship often continued past the designated terms of either individual, and the quaestor could be called upon for assistance or other needs by the consul. Breaking this pact or doing harm by a former superior would make the quaestor seem dishonorable or even treasonous.\n\nConstantine the Great created the office ' (quaestor of the sacred place) which functioned as the Roman Empire's senior legal official. Emperor Justinian I also created the offices ', a judicial and police official for Constantinople, and ' (quaestor of the army), a short-lived joint military-administrative post covering the border of the lower Danube. The ' survived long into the Byzantine Empire, although its duties were altered to match the \". The term is last attested in 14th century Byzantium as a purely honorific title.\n\nIn the early republic, there were two quaestors, and their duties were maintaining the public treasury, both taking in funds and deciding who to pay them to. This continued until 421 BCE when the number of quaestors was doubled to 4. While two continued with the same duties of those that had come before, the other two had additional responsibilities, each being in service to the one of the consuls. '\"\n\nWhen consuls went to war, each was assigned a quaestor. The quaestor's main responsibilities involved the distribution of war spoils between the aerarium, or public treasury, and the army.\nThe key responsibility of the quaestor was the administration of public funds to higher ranking officials in order to pursue their goals, whether those involve military conquests which require funding for armies or public works projects.\n\nThe office of quaestor was a position bound to their superior, whether that be a consul, governor, or other magistrate, and the duties would often reflect their superiors. For example, Gaius Gracchus was quaestor under the consul Orestes in Sardinia, and many of his responsibilities involved leading military forces. While not in direct command of the army, the quaestor would be in charge of organizational and lesser duties that were a necessary part of the war machine. \n\nDuring the reign of the Emperor Constantine I, the office of quaestor was reorganized into a judicial position known as the quaestor sacri palatii. The office functioned as the primary legal adviser to the emperor, and was charged with the creation of laws as well as answers petitions to the emperor.\n\nFrom 440 onward, the office of the quaestor worked in conjunction with the praetorian prefect of the East to oversea the supreme tribunal, or supreme court, at Constantinople. There they heard appeals from the various subordinate courts and governors.\n\nUnder the Emperor Justinian I, an additional office named quaestor was created to contorl police and judicial matters in Constantinople. In this new position, a quaestor was responsible for wills, as well as supervision of complaints by tenants regarding their landlords, and finally over the homeless.\n\nFollowing the death of his brother Tiberius Gracchus, Gaius Gracchus stayed out of political light for a period until he was forced to defend a good friend of his named Vettius in court. Hearing his vocal abilities, the Senate began to fear that Gauis would arouse the people in the same manner as his brother, and appointed him quaestor to Gnaeus Aufidius Orestes in Sardinia to prevent him from becoming a tribune. Gaius used his position as quaestor to successfully defeat his enemies as well as gain a large amount of loyalty among his troops. Following an incident where Gaius won the support of a local village to provide for his troops, the Senate attempted to keep Gaius in Sardinia indefinitely by reappointing Orestes to stay in Sardinia. Yet, Gaius was not pleased by this and returned to Rome demanding an explanation, actions which eventually led to his election as a tribune of the people. \n\nMarcus Antonius, or Mark Antony, who is most well known for his civil war with Octavian, started off his political career in the position of quaestor after being a prefect in Syria and then one of Julius Caesar's legates in Gaul. Through a combination of Caesar's favor and his oratory skills defending the legacy of Publius Clodius, Antony was able to win the quaestorship in 51 BCE. This then lead to Antony's election as augur and tribune of the people in 50 due to Caesar's efforts to reward his ally. \n\nQuaestor derives from the Latin verb ', ', meaning \"to inquire\". The job title has traditionally been understood as deriving from the original investigative function of the \".\nAncient authors, perhaps influenced by etymology, reasoned that the investigative role of the \" had evolved to include financial matters, giving rise to the similarly-named later offices. However, this connection has been questioned by modern scholars.\n\nThe Capuchin friars, in earlier centuries, would designate one or more of the members of each community as quaestor, whose duty was to go about the region collecting alms to support the friars and their works of charity.\n\nIn Italy a quaestor (Italian: \"questore\") heads the police of his province (\"Polizia di Stato\"), and his office is called \"questura\". Some quaestors have other assignments, however.\n\nIn Romania a quaestor (Romanian: \"chestor\") is also a senior police rank.\n\nThe European Parliament has five Quaestors to look after the financial and administrative needs of its members.\n\nSome ancient British universities, such as the University of St Andrews, have a quaestor who is responsible for financial management.\n\nIn the United States, the Sigma Chi Fraternity and the Kappa Delta Rho Fraternity currently uses the Officer title quaestor as their treasurer's name as he oversees the financial obligations of the Fraternity.\n\nIn Bulgaria, a quaestor is someone overseeing an examination procedure, typically in a university setting (similar to invigilator (UK and the Commonwealth), or proctor (US)).\n\nAt the University of St Andrews in Scotland, the quastor is an executive who is in charge of the university's finances and money, similar to the role of a treasurer.\n\n"}
{"id": "25228", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25228", "title": "Q.E.D.", "text": "Q.E.D.\n\nQ.E.D. (also written QED and \"QED\") is an initialism of the Latin phrase , meaning \"what was to be demonstrated\", or, less formally, \"thus it has been demonstrated\". Traditionally, the phrase is placed in its abbreviated form at the end of a mathematical proof or philosophical argument when the original proposition has been restated exactly, as the conclusion of the demonstration. The abbreviation thus signals the completion of the proof.\n\nThe phrase, \"quod erat demonstrandum\", is a translation into Latin from the Greek (; abbreviated as \"ΟΕΔ\"). Translating from the Latin into English yields, \"what was to be demonstrated\", however, translating the Greek phrase produces a slightly different meaning. Since the verb \"δείκνυμι\" also means \"to show\" or \"to prove\", a better translation from the Greek would read, \"The very thing it was required to have shown.\" \n\nThe Greek phrase was used by many early Greek mathematicians, including Euclid and Archimedes.\n\nDuring the European Renaissance, scholars often wrote in Latin, and phrases such as \"Q.E.D.\" often were used to conclude proofs.\nPerhaps the most famous use of \"Q.E.D.\" in a philosophical argument is found in the \"Ethics\" of Baruch Spinoza, published posthumously in 1677. Written in Latin, it is considered by many to be Spinoza's \"magnum opus\". The style and system of the book are, as Spinoza says, \"demonstrated in geometrical order\", with axioms and definitions followed by propositions. For Spinoza, this is a considerable improvement over René Descartes's writing style in the \"Meditations\", which follows the form of a diary.\n\nThere is another Latin phrase with a slightly different meaning, usually shortened similarly, but being less common in use. , originating from the Greek geometers' closing (), meaning \"which had to be done\". Because of the difference in meaning, the two phrases should not be confused. \n\nEuclid used the phrase, Quod erat faciendum (Q.E.F.), to close propositions that were not proofs of theorems, but constructions. For example, Euclid's first proposition showing how to construct an equilateral triangle, given one side, is concluded this way. \n\n\"Q.E.D.\" has acquired many translations in various languages, including:\n\nThere is no common formal English equivalent, although the end of a proof may be announced with a simple statement such as \"this completes the proof\", \"as required\", \"hence proved\", \"ergo\", or by using a similar locution. WWWWW or W - an abbreviation of \"Which Was What Was Wanted\" - has been used similarly. Often this is considered to be more tongue-in-cheek than the usual Halmos symbol \"(see below)\" or \"Q.E.D.\"\n\nDue to the paramount importance of proofs in mathematics, mathematicians since the time of Euclid have developed conventions to demarcate the beginning and end of proofs. In printed English language texts, the formal statements of theorems, lemmas, and propositions are set in italics by tradition. The beginning of a proof usually follows immediately thereafter, and is indicated by the word \"proof\" in boldface or italics. On the other hand, several symbolic conventions exist to indicate the end of a proof. \n\nWhile some authors still use the classical abbreviation, Q.E.D., this practice is increasingly viewed as archaic or even pretentious. Paul Halmos pioneered the use of a solid black square at the end of a proof as a Q.E.D symbol, a practice which has become standard, although not universal. Halmos adopted this use of a symbol from magazine typography customs in which simple geometric shapes had been used to indicate the end of an article. This symbol was later called the \"tombstone\" or \"Halmos symbol\" or even a \"halmos\" by mathematicians. Often the Halmos symbol is drawn on chalkboard to signal the end of a proof during a lecture, although this practice is not so common as its use in printed text.\n\nThe tombstone symbol appears in TeX as the character formula_1 (filled square, \\blacksquare) and sometimes, as a formula_2 (hollow square, \\square). In the AMS Theorem Environment for LaTeX, the hollow square is the default end-of-proof symbol. Unicode explicitly provides the \"End of proof\" character, U+220E (∎). Some authors use other Unicode symbols to note the end of a proof, including, ▮ (U+25AE, a black vertical rectangle), and ‣ (U+2023, a triangular bullet). Other authors have adopted two forward slashes (//) or four forward slashes (////). In other cases, authors have elected to segregate proofs typographically by displaying them as indented blocks.\n\nIn Joseph Heller's book \"Catch-22\", the Chaplain, having been told to examine a forged letter allegedly signed by him (which he knew he didn't sign), verified that his \"name\" was in fact there. His investigator replied, \"Then you wrote it. Q.E.D.\" The chaplain said he didn't write it and that it wasn't his handwriting, to which the investigator replied, \"Then you signed your name in somebody else's handwriting again.\"\n\nIn the 1978 science-fiction radio comedy, and later in the television and novel adaptations of \"The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy\", \"Q.E.D.\" is referred to in the Guide's entry for the babel fish, when it is claimed that the babel fish - which serves the \"mind-bogglingly\" useful purpose of being able to translate any spoken language when inserted into a person's ear - is used as evidence for existence and non-existence of God. The exchange from the novel is as follows: \"'I refuse to prove I exist,' says God, 'for proof denies faith, and without faith I am nothing.' 'But,' says Man, 'The babel fish is a dead giveaway, isn't it? It could not have evolved by chance. It proves you exist, and so therefore, by your own arguments, you don't. QED.' 'Oh dear,' says God, 'I hadn't thought of that,' and promptly vanishes in a puff of logic.\"\n\nIn Neal Stephenson's 1999 novel \"Cryptonomicon\", Q.E.D. is used as a punchline to several humorous anecdotes in which characters go to great lengths to prove something non-mathematical.\n\nSinger-songwriter Thomas Dolby's 1988 song \"Airhead\" includes the lyric, \"Quod erat demonstrandum, baby,\" referring to the self-evident vacuousness of the eponymous subject; and in response, a female voice squeals, delightedly, \"Oooh... you speak French!\" \n\n\n"}
{"id": "25229", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25229", "title": "Quagga", "text": "Quagga\n\nThe quagga ( or ) (\"Equus quagga quagga\") is an extinct subspecies of plains zebra that lived in South Africa until the 19th century. It was long thought to be a distinct species, but genetic studies have shown it to be the southernmost subspecies of plains zebra. It is considered particularly close to Burchell's zebra. Its name was derived from its call, which sounded like \"kwa-ha-ha\".\n\nThe quagga is believed to have been around long and tall at the shoulder. It was distinguished from other zebras by its limited pattern of primarily brown and white stripes, mainly on the front part of the body. The rear was brown and without stripes, and therefore more horse-like. The distribution of stripes varied considerably between individuals. Little is known about the quagga's behaviour, but it may have gathered into herds of 30–50 individuals. Quaggas were said to be wild and lively, yet were also considered more docile than Burchell's zebra. They were once found in great numbers in the Karoo of Cape Province and the southern part of the Orange Free State in South Africa.\n\nAfter the Dutch settlement of South Africa began, the quagga was heavily hunted as it competed with domesticated animals for forage. While some individuals were taken to zoos in Europe, breeding programs were unsuccessful. The last wild population lived in the Orange Free State, and the quagga was extinct in the wild by 1878. The last captive specimen died in Amsterdam on 12 August 1883. Only one quagga was ever photographed alive and only 23 skins are preserved today. In 1984, the quagga was the first extinct animal to have its DNA analysed, and the Quagga Project is trying to recreate the phenotype of hair coat pattern and related characteristics by selectively breeding Burchell's zebras.\n\nThe name \"quagga\" is derived from the Khoikhoi word for \"zebra\" and is onomatopoeic, being said to resemble the quagga's call, variously transcribed as \"kwa-ha-ha\", \"kwahaah\", or \"oug-ga\". The name is still used colloquially for the plains zebra. The quagga was originally classified as a distinct species, \"Equus quagga\", in 1778 by Dutch naturalist Pieter Boddaert. Traditionally, the quagga and the other plains and mountain zebras were placed in the subgenus \"Hippotigris\".\n\nThere has been much debate over the status of the quagga in relation to the plains zebra. It is poorly represented in the fossil record, and the identification of these fossils is uncertain, as they were collected at a time when the name \"quagga\" referred to all zebras. Fossil skulls of \"Equus mauritanicus\" from Algeria have been claimed to show affinities with the quagga and the plains zebra, but they may be too badly damaged to allow definite conclusions to be drawn from them. Quaggas have also been identified in cave art attributed to the San. Reginald Innes Pocock was perhaps the first to suggest that the quagga was a subspecies of plains zebra in 1902. As the quagga was scientifically described and named before the plains zebra, the trinomial name for the quagga becomes \"E. quagga quagga\" under this scheme, and the other subspecies of plains zebra are placed under \"E. quagga\" as well.\n\nHistorically, quagga taxonomy was further complicated by the fact that the extinct southernmost population of Burchell's zebra (\"Equus quagga burchellii\", formerly \"Equus burchellii burchellii\") was thought to be a distinct subspecies (also sometimes thought a full species, \"E. burchellii\"). The extant northern population, the \"Damara zebra\", was later named \"Equus quagga antiquorum\", which means that it is today also referred to as \"E. q. burchellii\", after it was realised they were the same taxon. The extinct population was long thought very close to the quagga, since it also showed limited striping on its hind parts. As an example of this, Shortridge placed the two in the now disused subgenus \"Quagga\" in 1934. Most experts now suggest that the two subspecies represent two ends of a cline.\n\nDifferent subspecies of plains zebra were recognised as members of \"Equus quagga\" by early researchers, though there was much confusion over which species were valid. Quagga subspecies were described on the basis of differences in striping patterns, but these differences were since attributed to individual variation within the same populations. Some subspecies and even species, such as \"E. q. danielli\" and \"Hippotigris isabellinus\", were only based on illustrations (iconotypes) of aberrant quagga specimens. Some authors have described the quagga as a kind of wild horse rather than a zebra, and one craniometric study from 1980 seemed to confirm its affiliation with the horse (\"Equus caballus\"). It has been pointed out that early morphological studies were erroneous; using skeletons from stuffed specimens can be problematical, as early taxidermists sometimes used donkey and horse skulls inside their mounts when the originals were unavailable.\n\nThe quagga was the first extinct animal to have its DNA analysed, and this 1984 study launched the field of ancient DNA analysis. It confirmed that the quagga was more closely related to zebras than to horses, with the quagga and mountain zebra (\"Equus zebra\") sharing an ancestor 3–4 million years ago. An immunological study published the following year found the quagga to be closest to the plains zebra. A 1987 study suggested that the mtDNA of the quagga diverged at a range of roughly 2% per million years, similar to other mammal species, and again confirmed the close relation to the plains zebra.\n\nLater morphological studies came to conflicting conclusions. A 1999 analysis of cranial measurements found that the quagga was as different from the plains zebra as the latter is from the mountain zebra. A 2004 study of skins and skulls instead suggested that the quagga was not a distinct species, but a subspecies of the plains zebra. In spite of these findings, many authors subsequently kept the plains zebra and the quagga as separate species.\n\nA genetic study published in 2005 confirmed the subspecific status of the quagga. It showed that the quagga had little genetic diversity, and that it diverged from the other plains zebra subspecies only between 120,000 and 290,000 years ago, during the Pleistocene, and possibly the penultimate glacial maximum. Its distinct coat pattern perhaps evolved rapidly because of geographical isolation and/or adaptation to a drier environment. In addition, plains zebra subspecies tend to have less striping the further south they live, and the quagga was the most southern-living of them all. Other large African ungulates diverged into separate species and subspecies during this period as well, probably because of the same climate shift. The simplified cladogram below is based on the 2005 analysis (some taxa shared haplotypes and could therefore not be differentiated):\n\nThe quagga is believed to have been long and tall at the shoulder. Its coat pattern was unique among equids: zebra-like in the front but more like a horse in the rear. It had brown and white stripes on the head and neck, brown upper parts and a white belly, tail and legs. The stripes were boldest on the head and neck and became gradually fainter further down the body, blending with the reddish brown of the back and flanks, until disappearing along the back. It appears to have had a high degree of polymorphism, with some individuals having almost no stripes and others having patterns similar to the extinct southern population of Burchell's zebra, where the stripes covered most of the body except for the hind parts, legs and belly. It also had a broad dark dorsal stripe on its back. It had a standing mane with brown and white stripes.\n\nThe only quagga to have been photographed alive was a mare at the Zoological Society of London's Zoo. Five photographs of this specimen are known, taken between 1863 and 1870. On the basis of photographs and written descriptions, many observers suggest that the stripes on the quagga were light on a dark background, unlike other zebras. Reinhold Rau, pioneer of the Quagga Project, claimed that this is an optical illusion: that the base colour is a creamy white and that the stripes are thick and dark. Embryological evidence supports zebras being dark coloured with white as an addition.\n\nLiving in the very southern end of the plains zebra's range, the quagga had a thick winter coat that moulted each year. Its skull was described as having a straight profile and a concave diastema, and as being relatively broad with a narrow occiput. Like other plains zebras, the quagga did not have a dewlap on its neck as the mountain zebra does. The 2004 morphological study found that the skeletal features of the southern Burchell's zebra population and the quagga overlapped, and that they were impossible to distinguish. Some specimens also appeared to be intermediate between the two in striping, and individuals of the extant Burchell's zebra population still exhibit limited striping. It can therefore be concluded that the two subspecies graded morphologically into each other. Today, some stuffed specimens of quaggas and southern Burchell's zebra are so similar that they are impossible to definitely identify as either, since no location data was recorded. The female specimens used in the study were larger than the males on average.\n\nThe quagga was the southernmost distributed plains zebra, mainly living south of the Orange River. It was a grazer, and its habitat range was restricted to the grasslands and arid interior scrubland of the Karoo region of South Africa, today forming parts of the provinces of Northern Cape, Eastern Cape, Western Cape and the Free State. These areas were known for distinctive flora and fauna and high amounts of endemism.\n\nLittle is known about the behaviour of quaggas in the wild, and it is sometimes unclear what exact species of zebra is referred to in old reports. The only source that unequivocally describes the quagga in the Free State is that of the English military engineer and hunter Major Sir William Cornwallis Harris. His 1840 account reads as follows:\n\nThe geographical range of the quagga does not appear to extend to the northward of the river Vaal. The animal was formerly extremely common within the colony; but, vanishing before the strides of civilisation, is now to be found in very limited numbers and on the borders only. Beyond, on those sultry plains which are completely taken possession of by wild beasts, and may with strict propriety be termed the domains of savage nature, it occurs in interminable herds; and, although never intermixing with its more elegant congeners, it is almost invariably to be found ranging with the white-tailed gnu and with the ostrich, for the society of which bird especially it evinces the most singular predilection. Moving slowly across the profile of the ocean-like horizon, uttering a shrill, barking neigh, of which its name forms a correct imitation, long files of quaggas continually remind the early traveller of a rival caravan on its march. Bands of many hundreds are thus frequently seen doing their migration from the dreary and desolate plains of some portion of the interior, which has formed their secluded abode, seeking for those more luxuriant pastures where, during the summer months, various herbs thrust forth their leaves and flowers to form a green carpet, spangled with hues the most brilliant and diversified.\n\nQuaggas have been reported gathering into herds of 30–50 individuals and sometimes travelled in a linear fashion. They may have been sympatric with Burchell's zebra between the Vaal and Orange rivers. This is disputed, and there is no evidence that they interbred. It could also have shared a small portion of its range with Hartmann's mountain zebra (\"Equus zebra hartmannae\").\n\nQuaggas were said to be lively and highly strung, especially the stallions. During the 1830s, quaggas were used as harness animals for carriages in London, the males probably being gelded to mitigate their volatile nature. Local farmers used them as guards for their livestock, as they were likely to attack intruders. On the other hand, captive quaggas in European zoos were said to be tamer and more docile than Burchell's zebra. One specimen was reported to have lived in captivity for 21 years and 4 months, dying in 1872.\n\nSince the practical function of striping has not been determined for zebras in general, it is unclear why the quagga lacked stripes on its hind parts. A cryptic function for protection from predators (stripes obscure the individual zebra in a herd) and biting flies (which are less attracted to striped objects), as well as various social functions, have been proposed for zebras in general. Differences in hind quarter stripes may have aided species recognition during stampedes of mixed herds, so that members of one subspecies or species would follow its own kind. It has also been evidence that the zebras developed striping patterns as thermoregulation to cool themselves down, and that the quagga lost them due to living in a cooler climate, although one problem with this is that the mountain zebra lives in similar environments and has a bold striping pattern. A 2014 study strongly supported the biting-fly hypothesis, and the quagga appears to have lived in areas with lesser amounts of fly activity compared to other zebras.\n\nAs it was easy to find and kill, the quagga was hunted by early Dutch settlers and later by Afrikaners to provide meat or for their skins. The skins were traded or used locally. The quagga was probably vulnerable to extinction due to its limited distribution, and it may have competed with domestic livestock for forage. The quagga had disappeared from much of its range by the 1850s. The last population in the wild, in the Orange Free State, was extirpated in the late 1870s. The last known wild individual died in 1878.\n\nIndividual quaggas were also captured and shipped to Europe, where they were displayed in zoos. Lord Morton tried to save the animal from extinction by starting a captive breeding program. He was only able to obtain a single male which, in desperation, he bred with a female horse. This produced a female hybrid with zebra stripes on its back and legs. Lord Morton's mare was sold and was subsequently bred with a black stallion, resulting in offspring that again had zebra stripes. An account of this was published in 1820 by the Royal Society. This led to new ideas on telegony, referred to as \"pan-genesis\" by Charles Darwin.\n\nThe specimen in London died in 1872 and the one in Berlin in 1875. The last captive individual, a female in Amsterdam's Natura Artis Magistra zoo, lived there from 9 May 1867 until it died on 12 August 1883, but its origin and cause of death are unclear. Its death was not recognised as signifying the extinction of its kind at the time, and the zoo requested another specimen; hunters believed it could still be found \"closer to the interior\" in the Cape Colony. Since locals used the term quagga to refer to all zebras, this may have led to the confusion. The extinction of the quagga was internationally accepted by the 1900 Convention for the Preservation of Wild Animals, Birds and Fish in Africa. The last specimen was featured on a Dutch stamp in 1988. There are 23 known stuffed and mounted quagga specimens throughout the world. In addition, there is a mounted head and neck, a foot, seven complete skeletons, and samples of various tissues. A twenty-fourth mounted specimen was destroyed in Königsberg, Germany, during World War II.\n\nAfter the very close relationship between the quagga and extant plains zebras was discovered, Reinhold Rau started the Quagga Project in 1987 in South Africa to create a quagga-like zebra population by selectively breeding for a reduced stripe pattern from plains zebra stock, with the eventual aim of introducing them to the quagga's former range. To differentiate between the quagga and the zebras of the project, they refer to it as \"Rau quaggas\". The founding population consisted of 19 individuals from Namibia and South Africa, chosen because they had reduced striping on the rear body and legs. The first foal of the project was born in 1988. Once a sufficiently quagga-like population has been created, it will be released in the Western Cape.\n\nIntroduction of these quagga-like zebras could be part of a comprehensive restoration program including such ongoing efforts as eradication of non-native trees. Quaggas, wildebeest, and ostriches, which occurred together during historical times in a mutually beneficial association, could be kept together in areas where the indigenous vegetation has to be maintained by grazing. In early 2006, the third and fourth generation animals produced by the project were considered looking much like the depictions and preserved specimens of the quagga. This type of selective breeding is called \"breeding back\". The practice is controversial, since the resulting zebras will resemble the quaggas only in external appearance, but will be genetically different. The technology to use recovered DNA for cloning does not yet exist.\n\n"}
{"id": "25231", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25231", "title": "QuickTime", "text": "QuickTime\n\nQuickTime is an extensible multimedia framework developed by Apple Inc., capable of handling various formats of digital video, picture, sound, panoramic images, and interactivity. First made in 1991, the latest Mac version, QuickTime X, is currently available on Mac OS X Snow Leopard and newer. Apple ceased support for the Windows version of QuickTime in 2016.\n\nAs of Mac OS X Lion, the underlying media framework for QuickTime, QTKit, is deprecated in favor of a newer graphics framework, AV Foundation. in iOS, the video player on the Internet was QuickTime-based, used to play videos on the internet.\n\nQuickTime is bundled with macOS. QuickTime for Microsoft Windows is downloadable as a standalone installation, and was bundled with Apple's iTunes prior to iTunes 10.5, but is no longer supported and therefore security vulnerabilities will no longer be patched.\n\nSoftware development kits (SDK) for QuickTime are available to the public with an Apple Developer Connection (ADC) subscription.\n\nIt is available free of charge for both macOS and Windows operating systems. There are some other free player applications that rely on the QuickTime framework, providing features not available in the basic QuickTime Player. For example, iTunes can export audio in WAV, AIFF, MP3, AAC, and Apple Lossless. In addition, macOS has a simple AppleScript that can be used to play a movie in full-screen mode, but since version 7.2 full-screen viewing is now supported in the non-Pro version.\n\nQuickTime Player 7 is limited to only basic playback operations unless a QuickTime Pro license key is purchased from Apple. Until recently, Apple's professional applications (e.g. Final Cut Studio, Logic Studio) included a QuickTime Pro license. Pro keys are specific to the major version of QuickTime for which they are purchased and unlock additional features of the QuickTime Player application on macOS or Windows. The Pro key does not require any additional downloads; entering the registration code immediately unlocks the hidden features.\n\nQuickTime 7 is still available for download from Apple, but as of mid 2016, Apple stopped selling registration keys for the Pro version.\n\nFeatures enabled by the Pro license include, but are not limited to:\n\nMac OS X Snow Leopard includes QuickTime X. QuickTime Player X lacks cut, copy and paste and will only export to four formats, but its limited export feature is free. Users do not have an option to upgrade to a Pro version of QuickTime X, but those who have already purchased QuickTime 7 Pro and are upgrading to Snow Leopard from a previous version of Mac OS X will have QuickTime 7 stored in the Utilities or user defined folder. Otherwise, users will have to install QuickTime 7 from the \"Optional Installs\" directory of the Snow Leopard DVD after installing the OS.\n\nMac OS X Lion and later also include QuickTime X. No installer for QuickTime 7 is included with these software packages, but users can download the QuickTime 7 installer from the Apple support site. QuickTime X on later versions of macOS support cut, copy and paste functions similarly to the way QuickTime 7 Pro did; the interface has been significantly modified to simplify these operations, however. The downloadable version of QuickTime 7 is also still supported.\n\nThe QuickTime framework provides the following:\n\nAs of early 2008, the framework hides many older codecs listed below from the user although the option to \"Show legacy encoders\" exists in QuickTime Preferences to use them. The framework supports the following file types and codecs natively:\n\nPictureViewer is a component of QuickTime for Microsoft Windows and the Mac OS 8 and Mac OS 9 operating systems. It is used to view picture files from the still image formats that QuickTime supports. In macOS, it is replaced by Preview.\n\nAs of version 7.7.9, the Windows version requires one to go to their \"Windows Uninstall Or Change A Program\" screen to \"modify\" their installation of QuickTime 7 to include the \"Legacy QuickTime Feature\" of \"QuickTime PictureViewer\".\n\nThe native file format for QuickTime video, QuickTime File Format, specifies a multimedia container file that contains one or more tracks, each of which stores a particular type of data: audio, video, effects, or text (e.g. for subtitles). Each track either contains a digitally encoded media stream (using a specific format) or a data reference to the media stream located in another file. The ability to contain abstract data references for the media data, and the separation of the media data from the media offsets and the track edit lists means that QuickTime is particularly suited for editing, as it is capable of importing and editing in place (without data copying).\n\nOther file formats that QuickTime supports natively (to varying degrees) include AIFF, WAV, DV-DIF, MP3, and MPEG program stream. With additional QuickTime Components, it can also support ASF, DivX Media Format, Flash Video, Matroska, Ogg, and many others.\n\nOn February 11, 1998, the ISO approved the QuickTime file format as the basis of the MPEG‑4 file format. The MPEG-4 file format specification was created on the basis of the QuickTime format specification published in 2001. The MP4 (.mp4) file format was published in 2001 as the revision of the MPEG-4 Part 1: Systems specification published in 1999 (ISO/IEC 14496-1:2001). In 2003, the first version of MP4 format was revised and replaced by MPEG-4 Part 14: MP4 file format (ISO/IEC 14496-14:2003). The MP4 file format was generalized into the ISO Base Media File Format ISO/IEC 14496-12:2004, which defines a general structure for time-based media files. It in turn is used as the basis for other multimedia file formats (for example 3GP, Motion JPEG 2000). A list of all registered extensions for ISO Base Media File Format is published on the official registration authority website www.mp4ra.org. This registration authority for code-points in \"MP4 Family\" files is Apple Computer Inc. and it is named in Annex D (informative) in MPEG-4 Part 12.\n\nBy 2000, MPEG-4 formats became industry standards, first appearing with support in QuickTime 6 in 2002. Accordingly, the MPEG-4 container is designed to capture, edit, archive, and distribute media, unlike the simple file-as-stream approach of MPEG-1 and MPEG-2.\n\nQuickTime 6 added limited support for MPEG-4; specifically encoding and decoding using Simple Profile (SP). Advanced Simple Profile (ASP) features, like B-frames, were unsupported (in contrast with, for example, encoders such as XviD or 3ivx). QuickTime 7 supports the H.264 encoder and decoder.\n\nBecause both MOV and MP4 containers can use the same MPEG-4 codecs, they are mostly interchangeable in a QuickTime-only environment. MP4, being an international standard, has more support. This is especially true on hardware devices, such as the Sony PSP and various DVD players; on the software side, most DirectShow / Video for Windows codec packs include a MP4 parser, but not one for MOV.\n\nIn QuickTime Pro's MPEG-4 Export dialog, an option called \"Passthrough\" allows a clean export to MP4 without affecting the audio or video streams. QuickTime 7 now supports multi-channel AAC-LC and HE-AAC audio (used, for example, in the high-definition trailers on Apple's site), for both .MOV and .MP4 containers.\n\nApple released the first version of QuickTime on December 2, 1991 as a multimedia add-on for System 6 and later. The lead developer of QuickTime, Bruce Leak, ran the first public demonstration at the May 1991 Worldwide Developers Conference, where he played Apple's famous 1984 advertisement in a window at 320×240 pixels resolution.\n\nThe original video codecs included:\n\nThe first commercial project produced using QuickTime 1.0 was the CD-ROM From Alice to Ocean. The first publicly visible use of QuickTime was Ben & Jerry's interactive factory tour (dubbed \"The Rik & Joe Show\" after its in-house developers). \"The Rik and Joe Show\" was demonstrated onstage at MacWorld in San Francisco when John Sculley announced QuickTime.\n\nApple released QuickTime 1.5 for Mac OS in the latter part of 1992. This added the SuperMac-developed Cinepak vector-quantization video codec (initially known as Compact Video). It could play video at 320×240 resolution at 30 frames per second on a 25 MHz Motorola 68040 CPU. It also added \"text\" tracks, which allowed for captioning, lyrics and other potential uses.\n\nApple contracted San Francisco Canyon Company to port QuickTime to the Windows platform. Version 1.0 of QuickTime for Windows provided only a subset of the full QuickTime API, including only movie playback functions driven through the standard movie controller.\n\nQuickTime 1.6 came out the following year. Version 1.6.2 first incorporated the \"QuickTime PowerPlug\" which replaced some components with PowerPC-native code when running on PowerPC Macs.\n\nApple released QuickTime 2.0 for System Software 7 in February 1994—the only version never released for free. It added support for music tracks, which contained the equivalent of MIDI data and which could drive a sound-synthesis engine built into QuickTime itself (using a limited set of instrument sounds licensed from Roland), or any external MIDI-compatible hardware, thereby producing sounds using only small amounts of movie data.\n\nFollowing Bruce Leak's departure to Web TV, the leadership of the QuickTime team was taken over by Peter Hoddie.\n\nQuickTime 2.0 for Windows appeared in November 1994 under the leadership of Paul Charlton. As part of the development effort for cross-platform QuickTime, Charlton (as architect and technical lead), along with ace individual contributor Michael Kellner and a small highly effective team including Keith Gurganus, ported a subset of the Macintosh Toolbox to Intel and other platforms (notably, MIPS and SGI Unix variants) as the enabling infrastructure for the QuickTime Media Layer (QTML) which was first demonstrated at the Apple Worldwide Developers Conference (WWDC) in May 1996. The QTML later became the foundation for the Carbon API which allowed legacy Macintosh applications to run on the Darwin kernel in Mac OS X.\n\nThe next versions, 2.1 and 2.5, reverted to the previous model of giving QuickTime away for free. They improved the music support and added sprite tracks which allowed the creation of complex animations with the addition of little more than the static sprite images to the size of the movie. QuickTime 2.5 also fully integrated QuickTime VR 2.0.1 into QuickTime as a QuickTime extension. On January 16, 1997, Apple released the QuickTime MPEG Extension (PPC only) as an add-on to QuickTime 2.5, which added software MPEG-1 playback capabilities to QuickTime.\n\nIn 1994, Apple filed suit against software developer San Francisco Canyon for intellectual property theft and breach of contract. Apple alleged that San Francisco Canyon had helped develop Video for Windows using several thousand lines of stolen QuickTime source code. Microsoft and Intel were added to the lawsuit in 1995. The suit ended in a settlement in 1997.\n\nThe release of QuickTime 3.0 for Mac OS on March 30, 1998 introduced the now-standard revenue model of releasing the software for free, but with additional features of the Apple-provided MoviePlayer application that end-users could only unlock by buying a QuickTime Pro license code. Since the \"Pro\" features were the same as the existing features in QuickTime 2.5, any previous user of QuickTime could continue to use an older version of the central MoviePlayer application for the remaining lifespan of Mac OS to 2002; indeed, since these additional features were limited to MoviePlayer, any other QuickTime-compatible application remained unaffected.\n\nQuickTime 3.0 added support for graphics importer components that could read images from GIF, JPEG, TIFF and other file formats, and video output components which served primarily to export movie data via FireWire. Apple also licensed several third-party technologies for inclusion in QuickTime 3.0, including the Sorenson Video codec for advanced video compression, the QDesign Music codec for substantial audio compression, and the complete Roland Sound Canvas instrument set and GS Format extensions for improved playback of MIDI music files. It also added video \"effects\" which programmers could apply in real-time to video tracks. Some of these effects would even respond to mouse clicks by the user, as part of the new movie interaction support (known as wired movies).\n\nDuring the development cycle for QuickTime 3.0, part of the engineering team was working on a more advanced version of QuickTime to be known as QuickTime interactive or QTi. Although similar in concept to the wired movies feature released as part of QuickTime 3.0, QuickTime interactive was much more ambitious. It allowed any QuickTime movie to be a fully interactive and programmable container for media. A special track type was added that contained an interpreter for a custom programming language based on 68000 assembly language. This supported a comprehensive user interaction model for mouse and keyboard event handling based in part on the AML language from the Apple Media Tool.\n\nThe QuickTime interactive movie was to have been the playback format for the next generation of HyperCard authoring tool. Both the QuickTime interactive and the HyperCard 3.0 projects were canceled in order to concentrate engineering resources on streaming support for QuickTime 4.0, and the projects were never released to the public.\n\nApple released QuickTime 4.0 on June 8, 1999 for Mac OS 7.5.5 through 8.6 (later Mac OS 9) and Windows 95, Windows 98, and Windows NT. Three minor updates (versions 4.0.1, 4.0.2, and 4.0.3) followed.\nIt introduced features that most users now consider basic:\n\nOn December 17, 1999, Apple provided QuickTime 4.1, this version's first major update. Two minor versions (4.1.1 and 4.1.2) followed. The most notable improvements in the 4.1.x family were:\n\nQuickTime 5 was one of the shortest-lived versions of QuickTime, released in April 2001 and superseded by QuickTime 6 a little over a year later. This version was the last to have greater capabilities under Mac OS 9 than under Mac OS X, and the last version of QuickTime to support Mac OS versions 7.5.5 through 8.5.1 on a PowerPC Mac and Windows 95. Version 5.0 was initially only released for Mac OS and Mac OS X on April 14, 2001, and version 5.0.1 followed shortly thereafter on April 23, 2001, supporting the classic Mac OS, Mac OS X, and Windows. Three more updates to QuickTime 5 (versions 5.0.2, 5.0.4, and 5.0.5) were released over its short lifespan.\n\nQuickTime 5 delivered the following enhancements:\n\nOn July 15, 2002, Apple released QuickTime 6.0, providing the following features:\n\n\nQuickTime 6 was initially available for Mac OS 8.6 – 9.x, Mac OS X (10.1.5 minimum), and Windows 98, Me, 2000, and XP. Development of QuickTime 6 for Mac OS slowed considerably in early 2003, after the release of Mac OS X v10.2 in August 2002. QuickTime 6 for Mac OS continued on the 6.0.x path, eventually stopping with version 6.0.3.\n\nQuickTime 6.1 & 6.1.1 for Mac OS X v10.1 and Mac OS X v10.2 (released October 22, 2002) and QuickTime 6.1 for Windows (released March 31, 2003) offered ISO-Compliant MPEG-4 file creation and fixed the CAN-2003-0168 vulnerability.\n\nApple released QuickTime 6.2 exclusively for Mac OS X on April 29, 2003 to provide support for iTunes 4, which allowed AAC encoding for songs in the iTunes library. (iTunes was not available for Windows until October 2003.)\n\nOn June 3, 2003, Apple released QuickTime 6.3, delivering the following:\n\nQuickTime 6.4, released on October 16, 2003 for Mac OS X v10.2, Mac OS X v10.3, and Windows, added the following:\n\nOn December 18, 2003, Apple released QuickTime 6.5, supporting the same systems as version 6.4. Versions 6.5.1 and 6.5.2 followed on April 28, 2004 and October 27, 2004. These versions would be the last to support Windows 98 and Me. The 6.5 family added the following features:\n\nQuickTime 6.5.3 was released on October 12, 2005 for Mac OS X v10.2.8 after the release of QuickTime 7.0, fixing a number of security issues.\n\nInitially released on April 29, 2005 in conjunction with Mac OS X v10.4 (for version 10.3.9 and 10.4.x), QuickTime 7.0 featured the following:\nAfter a couple of preview Windows releases, Apple released 7.0.2 as the first stable release on September 7, 2005 for Windows 2000 and Windows XP. Version 7.0.4, released on January 10, 2006 was the first universal binary version. But it suffered numerous bugs, including a buffer overrun, which is more problematic to most users.\n\nApple dropped support for Windows 2000 with the release of QuickTime 7.2 on July 11, 2007. The last version available for Windows 2000, 7.1.6, contains numerous security vulnerabilities. References to this version have been removed from the QuickTime site, but it can be downloaded from Apple's support section. Apple has not indicated that they will be providing any further security updates for older versions. QuickTime 7.2 is the first version for Windows Vista.\n\nApple dropped support for Flash content in QuickTime 7.3, breaking content that relied on Flash for interactivity, or animation tracks. Security concerns seem to be part of the decision. Flash flv files can still be played in QuickTime if the free Perian plugin is added.\n\nIn QuickTime 7.3, a processor that supports SSE is required. QuickTime 7.4 does not require SSE. Unlike versions 7.2 and 7.3, QuickTime 7.4 cannot be installed on Windows XP SP1 system (its setup program checks if Service Pack 2 is installed).\n\nQuickTime 7.5 was released on June 10, 2008. QuickTime 7.5.5 was released on September 9, 2008, which requires Mac OS X v10.4 or higher, dropping 10.3 support. QuickTime 7.6 was released on January 21, 2009. QuickTime 7.7 was released on August 23, 2011.\n\nQuickTime 7.6.6 is available for OS X, 10.6.3 Snow Leopard through the current, 10.11 El Capitan. There is a 7.7 release of QuickTime 7 for OS X, but it is only for Leopard 10.5.\n\nQuickTime 7.7.6 is the last release for Windows XP.\n\nQuickTime 7.7.9 is the last Windows release of QuickTime. Apple stopped supporting QuickTime on Windows afterwards.\n\nQuickTime X (pronounced \"QuickTime Ten\") was initially demonstrated at WWDC on June 8, 2009, and shipped with Mac OS X v10.6.\n\nIt includes visual chapters, conversion, sharing to YouTube, video editing, capture of video and audio streams, screen recording, GPU acceleration, and live streaming.\n\nBut it removed support for various widely used formats; in particular the omission of MIDI caused significant inconvenience and trouble to many musicians and their potential audiences.\n\nIn addition, a screen recorder is featured which records whatever is on the screen. However, to prevent bootlegging the user is unable to record any video that is played on the DVD Player or purchased content from iTunes, thus being greyed out.\n\nThe reason for the jump in numbering from 7 to 10 (X) was to indicate a similar break with the previous versions of the product that Mac OS X indicated. QuickTime X is fundamentally different from previous versions, in that it is provided as a Cocoa (Objective-C) framework and breaks compatibility with the previous QuickTime 7 C-based APIs that were previously used. QuickTime X was completely rewritten to implement modern audio video codecs in 64-bit. QuickTime X is a combination of two technologies: QuickTime Kit Framework (QTKit) and QuickTime X Player. QTKit is used by QuickTime player to display media. QuickTime X does not implement all of the functionality of the previous QuickTime as well as some of the codecs. When QuickTime X attempts to operate with a 32-bit codec or perform an operation not supported by QuickTime X, it will start a 32-bit helper process to perform the requested operation. The website \"Ars Technica\" revealed that QuickTime X uses QuickTime 7.x via QTKit to run older codecs that have not made the transition to 64-bit.\n\nQuickTime 7 may still be required to support older formats on Snow Leopard such as QTVR, interactive QuickTime movies, and MIDI files. In such cases, a compatible version of QuickTime 7 is included on Snow Leopard installation disc and may be installed side-by-side with QuickTime X. Users who have a Pro license for QuickTime 7 can then activate their license.\n\nA Snow Leopard compatible version of QuickTime 7 may also be downloaded from Apple Support website.\n\nThe software got an increment with the release of Mavericks, and as of June 2015, the current version is v10.4. It contains more sharing options (email, YouTube, Facebook, Flickr etc.), more export options (including web export in multiple sizes, and export for iPhone 4/iPad/Apple TV (but not Apple TV 2) ). It also includes a new way of fast forwarding through a video, magic mouse support for scrolling.\n\nQuickTime X provides the QTKit Framework on Mac OS 10.6 and greater.\n\nQuickTime consists of two major subsystems: the Movie Toolbox and the Image Compression Manager. The Movie Toolbox consists of a general API for handling time-based data, while the Image Compression Manager provides services for dealing with compressed raster data as produced by video and photo codecs.\n\nDevelopers can use the QuickTime software development kit (SDK) to develop multimedia applications for Mac or Windows with the C programming language or with the Java programming language (see QuickTime for Java), or, under Windows, using COM/ActiveX from a language supporting this.\n\nThe COM/ActiveX option was introduced as part of QuickTime 7 for Windows and is intended for programmers who want to build standalone Windows applications using high-level QuickTime movie playback and control with some import, export, and editing capabilities. This is considerably easier than mastering the original QuickTime C API.\n\nQuickTime 7 for Mac introduced the QuickTime Kit (aka QTKit), a developer framework that is intended to replace previous APIs for Cocoa developers. This framework is for Mac only, and exists as Objective-C abstractions around a subset of the C interface. Mac OS X v10.5 extends QTKit to full 64-bit support. The QTKit allows multiplexing between QuickTime X and QuickTime 7 behind the scenes so that the user need not worry about which version of QuickTime they need to use.\n\nQuickTime 7.4 was found to disable Adobe's video compositing program, After Effects. This was due to the DRM built into version 7.4 since it allowed movie rentals from iTunes. QuickTime 7.4.1 resolved this issue.\n\nVersions 4.0 through 7.3 contained a buffer overflow bug which could compromise the security of a PC using either the QuickTime Streaming Media client, or the QuickTime player itself. The bug was fixed in version 7.3.1.\n\nQuickTime 7.5.5 and earlier are known to have a list of significant vulnerabilities that allow a remote attacker to execute arbitrary code or cause a denial of service (out-of-bounds memory access and application crash) on a targeted system. The list includes six types of buffer overflow, data conversion, signed vs unsigned integer mismatch, and uninitialized memory pointer.\n\nQuickTime 7.6 has been found to disable Mac users' ability to play certain games, such as \"Civilization IV\" and \"The Sims 2\". There are fixes available from the publisher, Aspyr.\n\nQuickTime 7 lacks support for H.264 Sample Aspect Ratio. QuickTime X does not have this limitation, but many Apple products (such as iTunes and Apple TV) still use the older QuickTime 7 engine.\n\nQuickTime 7.7.x on Windows fails to encode H.264 on multi-core systems with more than approximately 20 threads, e.g. HP Z820 with 2× 8-core CPUs. A suggested solution is to disable hyper-threading/limit CPU cores. Encoding speed and stability depends on the scaling of the player window.\n\nOn April 14, 2016, Christopher Budd of Trend Micro announced that Apple has ceased all security patching of QuickTime for Windows, and called attention to two Zero Day Initiative advisories, ZDI-16-241\nApple responded with a statement that QuickTime 7 for Windows is no longer supported by Apple.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "25232", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25232", "title": "Quoin (disambiguation)", "text": "Quoin (disambiguation)\n\nQuoin or Du Quoin may refer to:\n\n\n"}
{"id": "25233", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25233", "title": "Quartz", "text": "Quartz\n\nQuartz is a mineral composed of silicon and oxygen atoms in a continuous framework of SiO silicon–oxygen tetrahedra, with each oxygen being shared between two tetrahedra, giving an overall chemical formula of SiO. Quartz is the second most abundant mineral in Earth's continental crust, behind feldspar.\n\nQuartz crystals are chiral, and exist in two forms, the normal α-quartz and the high-temperature β-quartz. The transformation from α-quartz to beta-quartz takes place abruptly at 573 °C (846 K). Since the transformation is accompanied by a significant change in volume, it can easily induce fracturing of ceramics or rocks passing through this temperature limit.\n\nThere are many different varieties of quartz, several of which are semi-precious gemstones. Since antiquity, varieties of quartz have been the most commonly used minerals in the making of jewelry and hardstone carvings, especially in Eurasia.\n\nThe word \"quartz\" is derived from the German word \"Quarz\" and its Middle High German ancestor \"twarc\", which probably originated in Slavic, cf. Czech \"tvrdý\" (\"hard\"), Polish \"twardy\" (\"hard\"), Serbian and Croatian \"tvrd\" (\"hard\").\n\nThe Ancient Greeks referred to quartz as κρύσταλλος (\"krustallos\") derived from the Ancient Greek \"κρύος\" (\"kruos\") meaning \"icy cold\", because some philosophers (including Theophrastus) apparently believed the mineral to be a form of supercooled ice. Today, the term \"rock crystal\" is sometimes used as an alternative name for the purest form of quartz.\n\nQuartz belongs to the trigonal crystal system. The ideal crystal shape is a six-sided prism terminating with six-sided pyramids at each end. In nature quartz crystals are often twinned (with twin right-handed and left-handed quartz crystals), distorted, or so intergrown with adjacent crystals of quartz or other minerals as to only show part of this shape, or to lack obvious crystal faces altogether and appear massive. Well-formed crystals typically form in a 'bed' that has unconstrained growth into a void; usually the crystals are attached at the other end to a matrix and only one termination pyramid is present. However, doubly terminated crystals do occur where they develop freely without attachment, for instance within gypsum. A quartz geode is such a situation where the void is approximately spherical in shape, lined with a bed of crystals pointing inward.\n\nα-quartz crystallizes in the trigonal crystal system, space group \"P\"321 or \"P\"321 depending on the chirality. β-quartz belongs to the hexagonal system, space group \"P\"622 and \"P\"622, respectively. These space groups are truly chiral (they each belong to the 11 enantiomorphous pairs). Both α-quartz and β-quartz are examples of chiral crystal structures composed of achiral building blocks (SiO tetrahedra in the present case). The transformation between α- and β-quartz only involves a comparatively minor rotation of the tetrahedra with respect to one another, without change in the way they are linked.\n\nAlthough many of the varietal names historically arose from the color of the mineral, current scientific naming schemes refer primarily to the microstructure of the mineral. Color is a secondary identifier for the cryptocrystalline minerals, although it is a primary identifier for the macrocrystalline varieties.\n\nPure quartz, traditionally called rock crystal or clear quartz, is colorless and transparent or translucent, and has often been used for hardstone carvings, such as the Lothair Crystal. Common colored varieties include citrine, rose quartz, amethyst, smoky quartz, milky quartz, and others.\n\nThe most important distinction between types of quartz is that of \"macrocrystalline\" (individual crystals visible to the unaided eye) and the microcrystalline or cryptocrystalline varieties (aggregates of crystals visible only under high magnification). The cryptocrystalline varieties are either translucent or mostly opaque, while the transparent varieties tend to be macrocrystalline. Chalcedony is a cryptocrystalline form of silica consisting of fine intergrowths of both quartz, and its monoclinic polymorph moganite. Other opaque gemstone varieties of quartz, or mixed rocks including quartz, often including contrasting bands or patterns of color, are agate, carnelian or sard, onyx, heliotrope, and jasper.\n\nAmethyst is a form of quartz that ranges from a bright to dark or dull purple color. The world's largest deposits of amethysts can be found in Brazil, Mexico, Uruguay, Russia, France, Namibia and Morocco. Sometimes amethyst and citrine are found growing in the same crystal. It is then referred to as ametrine. An amethyst is formed when there is iron in the area where it was formed.\n\nBlue quartz contains inclusions of fibrous magnesio-riebeckite or crocidolite.\n\nInclusions of the mineral dumortierite within quartz pieces often result in silky-appearing splotches with a blue hue, shades giving off purple and/or grey colors additionally being found. \"Dumortierite quartz\" (sometimes called \"blue quartz\") will sometimes feature contrasting light and dark color zones across the material. Interest in the certain quality forms of blue quartz as a collectible gemstone particularly arises in India and in the United States.\n\nCitrine is a variety of quartz whose color ranges from a pale yellow to brown due to ferric impurities. Natural citrines are rare; most commercial citrines are heat-treated amethysts or smoky quartzes. However, a heat-treated amethyst will have small lines in the crystal, as opposed to a natural citrine's cloudy or smokey appearance. It is nearly impossible to differentiate between cut citrine and yellow topaz visually, but they differ in hardness. Brazil is the leading producer of citrine, with much of its production coming from the state of Rio Grande do Sul. The name is derived from the Latin word \"citrina\" which means \"yellow\" and is also the origin of the word \"citron\". Sometimes citrine and amethyst can be found together in the same crystal, which is then referred to as ametrine. Citrine has been referred to as the \"merchant's stone\" or \"money stone\", due to a superstition that it would bring prosperity.\n\nCitrine was first appreciated as a golden-yellow gemstone in Greece between 300 and 150 BC, during the Hellenistic Age. The yellow quartz was used prior to that to decorate jewelry and tools but it was not highly sought-after.\n\nMilk quartz or milky quartz is the most common variety of crystalline quartz. The white color is caused by minute fluid inclusions of gas, liquid, or both, trapped during crystal formation, making it of little value for optical and quality gemstone applications.\n\nRose quartz is a type of quartz which exhibits a pale pink to rose red hue. The color is usually considered as due to trace amounts of titanium, iron, or manganese, in the massive material. Some rose quartz contains microscopic rutile needles which produces an asterism in transmitted light. Recent X-ray diffraction studies suggest that the color is due to thin microscopic fibers of possibly dumortierite within the massive quartz.\n\nAdditionally, there is a rare type of pink quartz (also frequently called crystalline rose quartz) with color that is thought to be caused by trace amounts of phosphate or aluminium. The color in crystals is apparently photosensitive and subject to fading. The first crystals were found in a pegmatite found near Rumford, Maine, USA and in Minas Gerais, Brazil.\n\nSmoky quartz is a gray, translucent version of quartz. It ranges in clarity from almost complete transparency to a brownish-gray crystal that is almost opaque. Some can also be black.\n\nPrasiolite, also known as \"vermarine\", is a variety of quartz that is green in color. Since 1950, almost all natural prasiolite has come from a small Brazilian mine, but it is also seen in Lower Silesia in Poland. Naturally occurring prasiolite is also found in the Thunder Bay area of Canada. It is a rare mineral in nature; most green quartz is heat-treated amethyst.\n\nNot all varieties of quartz are naturally occurring. Some clear quartz crystals can be treated using heat or gamma-irradiation to induce color where it would not otherwise have occurred naturally. Susceptibility to such treatments depends on the location from which the quartz was mined. \n\nPrasiolite, an olive colored material, is produced by heat treatment; natural prasiolite has also been observed in Lower Silesia in Poland. Although citrine occurs naturally, the majority is the result of heat-treated amethyst. Carnelian is widely heat-treated to deepen its color.\n\nBecause natural quartz is often twinned, synthetic quartz is produced for use in industry. Large, flawless, single crystals are synthesized in an autoclave via the hydrothermal process; emeralds are also synthesized in this fashion.\n\nLike other crystals, quartz may be coated with metal vapors to give it an attractive sheen.\n\nQuartz is a defining constituent of granite and other felsic igneous rocks. It is very common in sedimentary rocks such as sandstone and shale. It is a common constituent of schist, gneiss, quartzite and other metamorphic rocks. Quartz has the lowest potential for weathering in the Goldich dissolution series and consequently it is very common as a residual mineral in stream sediments and residual soils.\n\nWhile the majority of quartz crystallizes from molten magma, much quartz also chemically precipitates from hot hydrothermal veins as gangue, sometimes with ore minerals like gold, silver and copper. Large crystals of quartz are found in magmatic pegmatites. Well-formed crystals may reach several meters in length and weigh hundreds of kilograms.\n\nNaturally occurring quartz crystals of extremely high purity, necessary for the crucibles and other equipment used for growing silicon wafers in the semiconductor industry, are expensive and rare. A major mining location for high purity quartz is the Spruce Pine Gem Mine in Spruce Pine, North Carolina, United States.\n\nThe largest documented single crystal of quartz was found near Itapore, Goiaz, Brazil; it measured approximately 6.1×1.5×1.5 m and weighed more than 44 tonnes.\n\nTridymite and cristobalite are high-temperature polymorphs of SiO that occur in high-silica volcanic rocks. Coesite is a denser polymorph of SiO found in some meteorite impact sites and in metamorphic rocks formed at pressures greater than those typical of the Earth's crust. Stishovite is a yet denser and higher-pressure polymorph of SiO found in some meteorite impact sites. Lechatelierite is an amorphous silica glass SiO which is formed by lightning strikes in quartz sand.\n\nThe word \"quartz\" comes from the German , which is of Slavic origin (Czech miners called it \"křemen\"). Other sources attribute the word's origin to the Saxon word \"Querkluftertz\", meaning \"cross-vein ore\".\n\nQuartz is the most common material identified as the mystical substance maban in Australian Aboriginal mythology. It is found regularly in passage tomb cemeteries in Europe in a burial context, such as Newgrange or Carrowmore in Ireland. The Irish word for quartz is \"grianchloch\", which means 'sunstone'. Quartz was also used in Prehistoric Ireland, as well as many other countries, for stone tools; both vein quartz and rock crystal were knapped as part of the lithic technology of the prehistoric peoples.\n\nWhile jade has been since earliest times the most prized semi-precious stone for carving in East Asia and Pre-Columbian America, in Europe and the Middle East the different varieties of quartz were the most commonly used for the various types of jewelry and hardstone carving, including engraved gems and cameo gems, rock crystal vases, and extravagant vessels. The tradition continued to produce objects that were very highly valued until the mid-19th century, when it largely fell from fashion except in jewelry. Cameo technique exploits the bands of color in onyx and other varieties.\n\nRoman naturalist Pliny the Elder believed quartz to be water ice, permanently frozen after great lengths of time. (The word \"crystal\" comes from the Greek word \"κρύσταλλος\", \"ice\".) He supported this idea by saying that quartz is found near glaciers in the Alps, but not on volcanic mountains, and that large quartz crystals were fashioned into spheres to cool the hands. This idea persisted until at least the 17th century. He also knew of the ability of quartz to split light into a spectrum.\n\nIn the 17th century, Nicolas Steno's study of quartz paved the way for modern crystallography. He discovered that regardless of a quartz crystal's size or shape, its long prism faces always joined at a perfect 60° angle.\n\nQuartz's piezoelectric properties were discovered by Jacques and Pierre Curie in 1880. The quartz oscillator or resonator was first developed by Walter Guyton Cady in 1921. George Washington Pierce designed and patented quartz crystal oscillators in 1923. Warren Marrison created the first quartz oscillator clock based on the work of Cady and Pierce in 1927.\n\nEfforts to synthesize quartz began in the mid nineteenth century as scientists attempted to create minerals under laboratory conditions that mimicked the conditions in which the minerals formed in nature: German geologist Karl Emil von Schafhäutl (1803–1890) was the first person to synthesize quartz when in 1845 he created microscopic quartz crystals in a pressure cooker. However, the quality and size of the crystals that were produced by these early efforts were poor. \nBy the 1930s, the electronics industry had become dependent on quartz crystals. The only source of suitable crystals was Brazil; however, World War II disrupted the supplies from Brazil, so nations attempted to synthesize quartz on a commercial scale. German mineralogist Richard Nacken (1884–1971) achieved some success during the 1930s and 1940s. After the war, many laboratories attempted to grow large quartz crystals. In the United States, the U.S. Army Signal Corps contracted with Bell Laboratories and with the Brush Development Company of Cleveland, Ohio to synthesize crystals following Nacken's lead. (Prior to World War II, Brush Development produced piezoelectric crystals for record players.) By 1948, Brush Development had grown crystals that were 1.5 inches (3.8 cm) in diameter, the largest to date. By the 1950s, hydrothermal synthesis techniques were producing synthetic quartz crystals on an industrial scale, and today virtually all the quartz crystal used in the modern electronics industry is synthetic.\n\nSome types of quartz crystals have piezoelectric properties; they develop an electric potential upon the application of mechanical stress. An early use of this property of quartz crystals was in phonograph pickups. One of the most common piezoelectric uses of quartz today is as a crystal oscillator. The quartz clock is a familiar device using the mineral. The resonant frequency of a quartz crystal oscillator is changed by mechanically loading it, and this principle is used for very accurate measurements of very small mass changes in the quartz crystal microbalance and in thin-film thickness monitors.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "25234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25234", "title": "Quadrivium", "text": "Quadrivium\n\nThe quadrivium (plural: quadrivia) is the four subjects, or arts, taught after teaching the trivium. The word is Latin, meaning \"four ways\", and its use for the four subjects has been attributed to Boethius or Cassiodorus in the 6th century. Together, the trivium and the quadrivium comprised the seven liberal arts (based on thinking skills), as distinguished from the practical arts (such as medicine and architecture).\n\nThe quadrivium consisted of arithmetic, geometry, music and astronomy. These followed the preparatory work of the trivium, consisting of grammar, logic and rhetoric. In turn, the quadrivium was considered preparatory work for the study of philosophy (sometimes called the \"liberal art \"par excellence\"\") and theology.\n\nThese four studies compose the secondary part of the curriculum outlined by Plato in \"The Republic\" and are described in the seventh book of that work (in the order Arithmetic, Geometry, Astronomy, Music). \nThe quadrivium is implicit in early Pythagorean writings and in the \"De nuptiis\" of Martianus Capella, although the term \"quadrivium\" was not used until Boethius, early in the sixth century. As Proclus wrote:\nThe Pythagoreans considered all mathematical science to be divided into four parts: one half they marked off as concerned with quantity, the other half with magnitude; and each of these they posited as twofold. A quantity can be considered in regard to its character by itself or in its relation to another quantity, magnitudes as either stationary or in motion. Arithmetic, then, studies quantities as such, music the relations between quantities, geometry magnitude at rest, spherics [astronomy] magnitude inherently moving.\nAt many medieval universities, this would have been the course leading to the degree of Master of Arts (after the BA). After the MA, the student could enter for bachelor's degrees of the higher faculties (Theology, Medicine or Law). To this day, some of the postgraduate degree courses lead to the degree of Bachelor (the B.Phil and B.Litt. degrees are examples in the field of philosophy).\n\nThe study was eclectic, approaching the philosophical objectives sought by considering it from each aspect of the quadrivium within the general structure demonstrated by Proclus (AD 412–485), namely arithmetic and music on the one hand and geometry and cosmology on the other.\n\nThe subject of music within the quadrivium was originally the classical subject of harmonics, in particular the study of the proportions between the musical intervals created by the division of a monochord. A relationship to music as actually practised was not part of this study, but the framework of classical harmonics would substantially influence the content and structure of music theory as practised in both European and Islamic cultures.\n\nIn modern applications of the liberal arts as curriculum in colleges or universities, the quadrivium may be considered to be the study of number and its relationship to space or time: arithmetic was pure number, geometry was number in space, music was number in time, and astronomy was number in space and time. Morris Kline classified the four elements of the quadrivium as pure (arithmetic), stationary (geometry), moving (astronomy) and applied (music) number.\n\nThis schema is sometimes referred to as \"classical education\", but it is more accurately a development of the 12th- and 13th-century Renaissance with recovered classical elements, rather than an organic growth from the educational systems of antiquity. The term continues to be used by the Classical education movement and at the independent Oundle School, in the United Kingdom.\n\n"}
{"id": "25236", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25236", "title": "Quadrupedalism", "text": "Quadrupedalism\n\nQuadrupedalism or pronograde posture is a form of terrestrial locomotion in animals using four limbs or legs. An animal or machine that usually moves in a quadrupedal manner is known as a quadruped, meaning \"four feet\" (from the Latin \"quattuor\" for \"four\" and \"pes\" for \"foot\"). The majority of quadrupeds are vertebrate animals, including mammals such as cattle, dogs and cats, and reptiles such as lizards.\n\nFew other animals are quadrupedal, though a few birds like the shoebill sometimes use their wings to right themselves after lunging at prey.\n\nAlthough the words \"quadruped\" and \"tetrapod\" are both derived from terms meaning \"four-footed\", they have distinct meanings. A tetrapod is any member of the taxonomic unit \"Tetrapoda\" (which is defined by descent from a specific four-limbed ancestor) whereas a quadruped actually uses four limbs for locomotion. Not all tetrapods are quadrupeds and not all quadrupeds are tetrapods.\n\nThe distinction between quadrupeds and tetrapods is important in evolutionary biology, particularly in the context of tetrapods whose limbs have adapted to other roles (e.g. hands in the case of humans, wings in the case of birds, and fins in the case of whales). All of these animals are tetrapods, but none is a quadruped. Even snakes, whose limbs have become vestigial or lost entirely, are nevertheless tetrapods.\n\nMost quadrupedal animals are tetrapods but there are a few exceptions. For instance, among the insects, the praying mantis is a quadruped.\n\nIn July 2005, in rural Turkey, scientists discovered five Kurdish siblings who had learned to walk naturally on their hands and feet. Unlike chimpanzees, which ambulate on their knuckles, the Kurdish siblings walked on their palms, allowing them to preserve the dexterity of their fingers.\n\nMany people, especially practitioners of Parkour and Freerunning and Georges Hébert's Natural Method, find benefit in quadrupedal movements to build full body strength. Kenichi Ito is a Japanese man famous for speed running on four limbs. Quadrupedalism is sometimes referred to as being on all fours, and is observed in crawling especially by infants.\n\nBigDog is a dynamically stable quadruped robot created in 2005 by Boston Dynamics with Foster-Miller, the NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, and the Harvard University Concord Field Station.\n\nAlso by NASA JPL, in collaboration with University of California, Santa Barbara Robotics Lab, is RoboSimian, with emphasis on stability and deliberation. It has been demonstrated at the DARPA Robotics Challenge.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "25237", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25237", "title": "Quarantine", "text": "Quarantine\n\nA quarantine is used to separate and restrict the movement of people; it is a 'state of enforced isolation'. This is often used in connection to disease and illness, such as those who may possibly have been exposed to a communicable disease. The term is often erroneously used to mean medical isolation, which is \"to separate ill persons who have a communicable disease from those who are healthy\". The word comes from an Italian variant (seventeenth-century Venetian) of 'quaranta giorni', meaning forty days, was the period that all ships were required to be isolated before passengers and crew could go ashore during the Black Death plague epidemic. Quarantine can be applied to humans, but also to animals of various kinds, and both as part of border control as well as within a country.\n\nThe quarantining of people often raises questions of civil rights, especially in cases of long confinement or segregation from society, such as that of Mary Mallon (aka Typhoid Mary), a typhoid fever carrier who spent the last 24 years and 7 months her life under quarantine.\n\nQuarantine periods can be very short, such as in the case of a suspected anthrax attack, in which persons are allowed to leave as soon as they shed their potentially contaminated garments and undergo a decontamination shower. For example, an article entitled \"Daily News workers quarantined\" describes a brief quarantine that lasted until people could be showered in a decontamination tent. (Kelly Nankervis, Daily News).\n\nThe February/March 2003 issue of \"HazMat Magazine\" suggests that people be \"locked in a room until proper decon could be performed\", in the event of \"suspect anthrax\".\n\n\"Standard-Times\" senior correspondent Steve Urbon (14 February 2003) describes such temporary quarantine powers:\n\nCivil rights activists in some cases have objected to people being rounded up, stripped and showered against their will. But Capt. Chmiel said local health authorities have \"certain powers to quarantine people\".\nThe purpose of such quarantine-for-decontamination is to prevent the spread of contamination, and to contain the contamination such that others are not put at risk from a person fleeing a scene where contamination is suspect. It can also be used to limit exposure, as well as eliminate a vector.\n\nThe first astronauts to visit the Moon were quarantined upon their return at the specially built Lunar Receiving Laboratory.\n\nNew developments for quarantine include new concepts in quarantine vehicles such as the ambulance bus, mobile hospitals, and lockdown/invacuation (inverse evacuation) procedures, as well as docking stations for an ambulance bus to dock to a facility that's under lockdown.\n\nInfected people were separated to prevent spread of disease among the ancient Israelites under the Mosaic Law, as recorded in the Old Testament.\n\nThe word \"quarantine\" originates from the Venetian dialect form of the Italian \"quaranta giorni\", meaning 'forty days'. This is due to the 40-day isolation of ships and people before entering the city of Dubrovnik in Croatia. This was practiced as a measure of disease prevention related to the Black Death. Between 1348 and 1359, the Black Death wiped out an estimated 30% of Europe's population, and a significant percentage of Asia's population. The original document from 1377, which is kept in the Archives of Dubrovnik, states that before entering the city, newcomers had to spend 30 days (a \"trentine\") in a restricted place (originally nearby islands) waiting to see whether the symptoms of Black Death would develop. Later, isolation was prolonged to 40 days and was called quarantine.\n\nOther diseases lent themselves to the practice of quarantine before and after the devastation of the plague. Those afflicted with leprosy were historically isolated from society, as were the attempts to check the invasion of syphilis in northern Europe in about 1490, the advent of yellow fever in Spain at the beginning of the 19th century, and the arrival of Asiatic cholera in 1831.\n\nVenice took the lead in measures to check the spread of plague, having appointed three guardians of public health in the first years of the Black Death (1348). The next record of preventive measures comes from Reggio in Modena in 1374. The first lazaret was founded by Venice in 1403, on a small island adjoining the city. In 1467, Genoa followed the example of Venice, and in 1476 the old leper hospital of Marseille was converted into a plague hospital. The great lazaret of Marseilles, perhaps the most complete of its kind, was founded in 1526 on the island of Pomègues. The practice at all the Mediterranean lazarets was not different from the English procedure in the Levantine and North African trade. On the approach of cholera in 1831 some new lazarets were set up at western ports, notably a very extensive establishment near Bordeaux, afterwards turned to another use.\n\nSince 1852 several conferences were held involving European powers, with a view to uniform action in keeping out infection from the East and preventing its spread within Europe. All but that of 1897 were concerned with cholera. No result came of those at Paris (1852), Constantinople (1866), Vienna (1874), and Rome (1885), but each of the subsequent ones doctrine of constructive infection of a ship as coming from a scheduled port, and an approximation to the principles advocated by Great Britain for many years. The principal countries which retained the old system at the time were Spain, Portugal, Turkey, Greece and Russia (the British possessions at the time, Gibraltar, Malta and Cyprus, being under the same influence). The aim of each international sanitary convention had been to bind the governments to a uniform minimum of preventive action, with further restrictions permissible to individual countries. The minimum specified by international conventions was very nearly the same as the British practice, which had been in turn adapted to continental opinion in the matter of the importation of rags.\nThe Venice convention of 30 January 1892 dealt with cholera by the Suez Canal route; that of Dresden of 15 April 1893, with cholera within European countries; that of Paris of 3 April 1894, with cholera by the pilgrim traffic; and that of Venice, on 19 March 1897, was in connection with the outbreak of plague in the East, and the conference met to settle on an international basis the steps to be taken to prevent, if possible, its spread into Europe. An additional convention was signed in Paris on 3 December 1903.\n\nA multilateral international sanitary convention was concluded at Paris on 17 January 1912. This convention was most comprehensive and was designated to replace all previous conventions on that matter. It was signed by 40 countries, and consisted of 160 articles. Ratifications by 16 of the signatories were exchanged in Paris on 7 October 1920. Another multilateral convention was signed in Paris on 21 June 1926, to replace that of 1912. It was signed by 58 countries worldwide, and consisted of 172 articles.\n\nIn Latin America, a series of regional sanitary conventions were concluded. Such a convention was concluded in Rio de Janeiro on 12 June 1904. A sanitary convention between the governments of Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay and Uruguay was concluded in Montevideo on 21 April 1914. The convention covers cases of Asiatic cholera, oriental plague and yellow fever. It was ratified by the Uruguayan government on 13 October 1914, by the Paraguayan government on 27 September 1917 and by the Brazilian government on 18 January 1921.\n\nSanitary conventions were also concluded between European states. A Soviet-Latvian sanitary convention was signed on 24 June 1922, for which ratifications were exchanged on 18 October 1923. A bilateral sanitary convention was concluded between the governments of Latvia and Poland on 7 July 1922, for which ratifications were exchanged on 7 April 1925. Another was concluded between the governments of Germany and Poland in Dresden on 18 December 1922, and entered into effect on 15 February 1923. Another one was signed between the governments of Poland and Romania on 20 December 1922. Ratifications were exchanged on 11 July 1923. The Polish government also concluded such a convention with the Soviet government on 7 February 1923, for which ratifications were exchanged on 8 January 1924. A sanitary convention was also concluded between the governments of Poland and Czechoslovakia on 5 September 1925, for which ratifications were exchanged on 22 October 1926. A convention was signed between the governments of Germany and Latvia on 9 July 1926, for which ratifications were exchanged on 6 July 1927.\n\nOne of the first points to be dealt with in 1897 was to settle the incubation period for this disease, and the period to be adopted for administrative purposes. It was admitted that the incubation period was, as a rule, a comparatively short one, namely, of some three or four days. After much discussion ten days was accepted by a very large majority. The principle of disease notification was unanimously adopted. Each government had to notify to other governments on the existence of plague within their several jurisdictions, and at the same time state the measures of prevention which are being carried out to prevent its diffusion. The area deemed to be infected was limited to the actual district or village where the disease prevailed, and no locality was deemed to be infected merely because of the importation into it of a few cases of plague while there has been no diffusion of the malady. As regards the precautions to be taken on land frontiers, it was decided that during the prevalence of plague every country had the inherent right to close its land frontiers against traffic. As regards the Red Sea, it was decided after discussion that a healthy vessel could pass through the Suez Canal, and continue its voyage in the Mediterranean during the period of incubation of the disease the prevention of which is in question. It was also agreed that vessels passing through the Canal in quarantine might, subject to the use of the electric light, coal in quarantine at Port Said by night as well as by day, and that passengers might embark in quarantine at that port. Infected vessels, if these carry a doctor and are provided with a disinfecting stove, have a right to navigate the Canal, in quarantine, subject only to the landing of those who were suffering from plague.\n\nPlain yellow, green, and even black flags have been used to symbolize disease in both ships and ports, with the color yellow having a longer historical precedent, as a color of marking for houses of infection, previous to its use as a maritime marking color for disease. The present flag used for the purpose is the \"Lima\" (L) flag, which is a mixture of yellow and black flags previously used. It is sometimes called the \"yellow jack\" but this was also a name for yellow fever, which probably derives its common name from the flag, not the color of the victims (cholera ships also used a yellow flag). The plain yellow flag (\"Quebec\" or Q in international maritime signal flags) probably derives its letter symbol for its initial use in \"quarantine\", but this flag in modern times indicates the opposite—a ship that declares itself free of quarantinable disease, and requests boarding and routine port inspection.\n\nAustralia has perhaps the world's strictest quarantine standards. Quarantine in northern Australia is important because of its proximity to South-east Asia and the Pacific, which have many pests and diseases not present in Australia. For this reason, the region from Cairns to Broome—including the Torres Strait—is the focus for many important quarantine activities that protect all Australians. As Australia has been geographically isolated from other major continents for millions of years, there is an endemically unique ecosystem free of several severe pests and diseases that are present in many parts of the world. If other products are brought inside along with pests and diseases, it would damage the ecosystem seriously and add millions of costs in the local agricultural businesses.\n\nThe Australian Quarantine and Inspection Service is responsible for border-inspection of any products which are brought into Australia, and assess the potential risks the products might harm Australian environment. Visitors are required to fill in the information card truthfully before arriving in Australia, and declare what food and any products made of wood and other natural materials they have processed. If the visitor fails to do so, usually a quarantine fine of 220 Australian dollars are to be paid as quarantine infringement notice, and if not, the visitor may face criminal convictions of fining 100,000 Australian dollars and 10 years imprisonment.\n\nThere are three quarantine Acts of Parliament in Canada: \"Quarantine Act\" (humans) and \"Health of Animals Act\" (animals) and \"Plant Protection Act\" (vegetations). The first legislation is enforced by the Canada Border Services Agency after a complete rewrite in 2005. The second and third legislations are enforced by the Canadian Food Inspection Agency. If a health emergency exists, the Governor in Council can prohibit importation of anything that it deems necessary under the \"Quarantine Act\".\n\nUnder the \"Quarantine Act\", all travellers must submit to screening and if they believe they might have come into contact with communicable diseases or vectors, they must disclose their whereabouts to a Border Services Officer. If the officer has reasonable grounds to believe that the traveller is or might have been infected with a communicable disease or refused to provide answers, a quarantine officer (QO) must be called and the person is to be isolated. If a person refuses to be isolated, any peace officer may arrest without warrant.\n\nA QO who has reasonable grounds to believe that the traveller has or might have a communicable disease or is infested with vectors, after the medical examination of a traveller, can order him/her into treatment or measures to prevent the person from spreading the disease. QO can detain any traveller who refuses to comply with his/her orders or undergo health assessments as required by law.\n\nUnder the \"Health of Animals Act\" and \"Plant Protection Act\", inspectors can prohibit access to an infected area, dispose or treat any infected or suspected to be infected animals or plants. The Minister can order for compensation to be given if animals/plants were destroyed pursuant to these acts.\n\nEach province also enacts its own quarantine/environmental health legislations.\n\nUnder the \"Prevention and Control of Disease Ordinance\" (HK Laws. Chap 599), a health officer may seize articles he/she believes to be infectious or contains infectious agents. All travellers, if requested, must submit themselves to a health officer. Failure to do so is against the law and is subject to arrest and prosecution.\n\nThe law allows for a health officer who have reasonable grounds to detain, isolate, quarantine anyone or anything believed to be infected and to restrict any articles from leaving a designated quarantine area. He/she may also order the Civil Aviation Department to prohibit the landing or leaving, embarking or disembarking of an aircraft. This power also extends to land, sea or air crossings.\n\nUnder the same ordinance, any police officer, health officer, members of the Civil Aid Service or Auxiliary Medical Service can arrest a person who obstructs or escape from detention.\n\nTo reduce the risk of introducing rabies from continental Europe, the United Kingdom used to require that dogs, and most other animals introduced to the country, spend six months in quarantine at an HM Customs and Excise pound; this policy was abolished in 2000 in favour of a scheme generally known as Pet Passports, where animals can avoid quarantine if they have documentation showing they are up to date on their appropriate vaccinations.\n\nThe plague had disappeared from England, never to return, for more than thirty years before the practice of quarantine against it was definitely established by the Quarantine Act 1710 (\"9 Ann.\") The first act was called for, owing to an alarm, lest plague should be imported from Poland and the Baltics; the second act of 1721 was due to the disastrous prevalence of plague at Marseille and other places in Provence, France; it was renewed in 1733 owing to a fresh outbreak of the malady on the continent of Europe, and again in 1743, owing to the disastrous epidemic at Messina. In 1752 a rigorous quarantine clause was introduced into an act regulating the Levantine trade; and various arbitrary orders were issued during the next twenty years to meet the supposed danger of infection from the Baltics. Although no plague cases ever came to England all those years, the restrictions on traffic became more and more stringent (following the movements of medical dogma), and in 1788 a very oppressive Quarantine Act was passed, with provisions affecting cargoes in particular. The first year of the nineteenth century marked the turning-point in quarantine legislation; a parliamentary committee sat on the practice, and a more reasonable act arose on their report. In 1805 there was another new act, and in 1823–24 again an elaborate inquiry followed by an act making the quarantine only at discretion of the privy council, and at the same time recognizing yellow fever or other highly infectious disorder as calling for quarantine measures along with plague. The steady approach of cholera in 1831 was the last occasion in England of a thoroughgoing resort to quarantine restrictions. The pestilence invaded every country of Europe despite all efforts to keep it out. In England the experiment of hermetically sealing the ports was not seriously tried when cholera returned in 1849, 1853 and 1865–66. In 1847 the privy council ordered all arrivals with clean bills from the Black Sea and the Levant to be admitted to free pratique, provided there had been no case of plague during the voyage; and therewith the last remnant of the once formidable quarantine practice against plague may be said to have disappeared.\n\nFor a number of years after the passing of the first Quarantine Act (1710) the protective practices in England were of the most haphazard and arbitrary kind. In 1721 two vessels laden with cotton goods from Cyprus, then a seat of plague, were ordered to be burned with their cargoes, the owners receiving as indemnity. By the clause in the Levant Trade Act of 1752 vessels for the United Kingdom with a foul bill (i.e. coming from a country where plague existed) had to repair to the lazarets of Malta, Venice, Messina, Livorno, Genoa or Marseille, to perform their quarantine or to have their cargoes sufficiently opened and aired. Since 1741 Stangate Creek (on the Medway) had been made the quarantine station at home; but it would appear from the above clause that it was available only for vessels with clean bills. In 1755 lazarets in the form of floating hulks were established in England for the first time, the cleansing of cargo (particularly by exposure to dews) having been done previously on the ship's deck. There was no medical inspection employed, but the whole routine left to the officers of customs and quarantine. In 1780, when plague was in Poland, even vessels with grain from the Baltic had to lie forty days in quarantine, and unpack and air the sacks; but owing to remonstrances, which came chiefly from Edinburgh and Leith, grain was from that date declared to be a non-susceptible article. About 1788 an order of the council required every ship liable to quarantine, in case of meeting any vessel at sea, or within four leagues of the coast of Great Britain or Ireland, to hoist a yellow flag in the daytime and show a light at the main topmast head at night, under a penalty of After 1800, ships from plague-countries (or with foul bills) were enabled to perform their quarantine on arrival in the Medway instead of taking a Mediterranean port on the way for that purpose; and about the same time an extensive lazaret was built on Chetney Hill near Chatham at an expense of which was almost at once condemned owing to its marshy foundations, and the materials sold for The use of floating hulks as lazarets continued as before. In 1800 two ships with hides from Mogador (Morocco) were ordered to be sunk with their cargoes at the Nore, the owners receiving About this period it was merchandise that was chiefly suspected: there was a long schedule of susceptible articles, and these were first exposed on the ship's deck for twenty-one days or less (six days for each instalment of the cargo), and then transported to the lazaret, where they were opened and aired forty days more. The whole detention of the vessel was from sixty to sixty-five days, including the time for reshipment of her cargo. Pilots had to pass fifteen days on board a convalescent ship. The expenses may be estimated from one or two examples. In 1820 the \"Asia\", 763 tons, arrived in the Medway with a foul bill from Alexandria, laden with linseed; her freight was and her quarantine dues The same year the \"Pilato\", 495 tons, making the same voyage, paid quarantine dues on a freight of In 1823 the expenses of the quarantine service (at various ports) were and the dues paid by shipping (nearly all with clean bills) A return for the United Kingdom and colonies in 1849 showed, among other details, that the expenses of the lazaret at Malta for ten years from 1839 to 1848 had been From 1846 onwards the establishments in the United Kingdom were gradually reduced, while the last vestige of the British quarantine law was removed by the Public Health Act 1896, which repealed the Quarantine Act 1825 (with dependent clauses of other acts), and transferred from the privy council to the Local Government Board the powers to deal with ships arriving infected with yellow fever or plague, the powers to deal with cholera ships having been already transferred by the Public Health Act 1875.\n\nThe British regulations of 9 November 1896 applied to yellow fever, plague and cholera. Officers of the Royal Customs, as well as of Royal Coast Guard and Board of Trade (for signalling), were empowered to take the initial steps. They certified in writing the master of a supposed infected ship, and detained the vessel provisionally for not more than twelve hours, giving notice meanwhile to the port sanitary authority. The medical officer of the port boarded the ship and examined every person in it. Every person found infected was certified of the fact, removed to a hospital provided (if his condition allow), and kept under the orders of the medical officer. If the sick could be removed, the vessel remained under his orders. Every person suspected (owing to his or her immediate attendance on the sick) could be detained on board for 48 hours or removed to the hospital for a similar period. All others were free to land on giving the addresses of their destinations to be sent to the respective local authorities, so that the dispersed passengers and crew could be kept individually under observation for a few days. The ship was then disinfected, dead bodies buried at sea, infected clothing, bedding, etc., destroyed or disinfected, and bilge-water and water-ballast (subject to exceptions) pumped out at a suitable distance before the ship entered a dock or basin. Mail was subject to no detention. A stricken ship within 3 miles of the shore had to fly at the main mast a yellow and black flag borne quarterly from sunrise to sunset.\n\nThe United States puts immediate quarantines on imported products if the disease can be traced back to a certain shipment or product. All imports will also be quarantined if the diseases breakout in other countries. \nAccording to Title 42 U.S.C. §§264 and 266, these statutes provide the Secretary of the Department of Health and Human Services (\"the Secretary\") peacetime and wartime authority, respectively, to control the movement of persons into and within the United States to prevent the spread of communicable disease.\n\nCommunicable diseases for which apprehension, detention, or conditional release of persons are authorized must be specified in Executive Orders of the President. Executive Order 13295 (Revised List of Quarantinable Communicable Diseases, April 4, 2003) and its amendments (executive orders 13375 and 13674) specify the following infectious diseases: (1) cholera, (2) diphtheria, (3) infectious tuberculosis, (4) plague, (5) smallpox, (6) yellow fever, (7) viral hemorrhagic fevers (Lassa, Marburg, Ebola, Crimean-Congo, South American, and others not yet isolated or named), (8) severe acute respiratory syndromes, and (9) influenza, from a novel or re-emergent source. In the event of conflict of federal, state, local, and/or tribal health authorities in the use of legal quarantine power, federal law is supreme.\n\nThe Division of Global Migration and Quarantine (DGMQ) of the US Center for Disease Control (CDC) operates small quarantine facilities at a number of US ports of entry. As of 2014, these included one land crossing (in El Paso, Texas) and 19 international airports.\nBesides the port of entry where it is located, each station is also responsible for quarantining potentially infected travelers entering through any ports of entry in its assigned region. These facilities are fairly small; each one is operated by a few staff members and capable of accommodating 1-2 travelers for a short observation period. Cost estimates for setting up a temporary larger facility, capable of accommodating 100 to 200 travelers for several weeks, have been published by the Airport Cooperative Research Program in 2008.\n\nQuarantine law began in Colonial America in 1663, when in an attempt to curb an outbreak of smallpox, the city of New York established a quarantine. In the 1730s, the city built a quarantine station on the Bedloe's Island. The Philadelphia Lazaretto was the first quarantine hospital in the United States, built in 1799, in Tinicum Township, Delaware County, Pennsylvania. There are similar national landmarks such as Swinburne Island and Angel Island (a much more famous historic site, Ellis Island, is often mistakenly assumed to have been a quarantine station, however its marine hospital only qualified as a contagious disease facility to handle less virulent diseases like measles, trachoma and less advanced stages of tuberculosis and diphtheria; persons afflicted with smallpox, yellow fever, cholera, leprosy or typhoid fever, could neither be received nor treated there).\nDuring the 1918 flu pandemic, people were also quarantined. Most commonly suspect cases of infectious diseases are requested to voluntarily quarantine themselves, and Federal and local quarantine statutes only have been uncommonly invoked since then, including for a suspected smallpox case in 1963.\n\nIn 2007, Andrew Speaker, an Atlanta attorney on his honeymoon in Europe, was diagnosed by the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) with extensively drug-resistant tuberculosis (XDR-TB), which is contagious, untreatable, and potentially lethal. Speaker returned to the U.S. against the instructions of the CDC, and he was served with a federal order of quarantine by the CDC at a New York hospital, the first such order to be issued in nearly half a century. Speaker challenged the diagnosis, resulting in a new diagnosis of a milder form of tuberculosis and the lifting of restrictions on his movements. The Speaker case drew significant public attention, and Congress held formal hearings about the incident. Speaker's case highlighted a vital issue in public health law: the circumstances, if any, under which public officials may detain individuals against their will to protect the public from communicable diseases, and the conflict between the utilitarian principle of social good and the individual rights guaranteed by the United States Constitution.\n\nAlso other TB carriers who refuse to wear a mask in public have been indefinitely involuntarily committed to regular jails, and cut off from contacting the world. Some have complained of abuse there.\n\nU.S. President John F. Kennedy euphemistically referred to the U.S. Navy's interdiction of shipping en route to Cuba during the Cuban Missile Crisis as a \"quarantine\" rather than a blockade, because a quarantine is a legal act in peacetime, whereas a blockade is defined as an act of aggression under the U.N. Charter.\n\nIn computer science, \"quarantining\" describes putting files infected by computer viruses into a special directory, so as to eliminate the threat they pose, without irreversibly deleting them.\n\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "25239", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25239", "title": "Quasar", "text": "Quasar\n\nA quasar () (also quasi-stellar object or QSO) is an active galactic nucleus of very high luminosity. A quasar consists of a supermassive black hole surrounded by an orbiting accretion disk of gas. As gas in the accretion disk falls toward the black hole, energy is released in the form of electromagnetic radiation. Quasars emit energy across the electromagnetic spectrum and can be observed at radio, infrared, visible, ultraviolet, and X-ray wavelengths. The most powerful quasars have luminosities exceeding 10 W, thousands of times greater than the luminosity of a large galaxy such as the Milky Way.\n\nThe term \"quasar\" originated as a contraction of \"quasi-stellar radio source\", because quasars were first identified as sources of radio-wave emission, and in photographic images at visible wavelengths they resembled point-like stars. High-resolution images of quasars, particularly from the Hubble Space Telescope, have demonstrated that quasars occur in the centers of galaxies, and that some quasar host galaxies are strongly interacting or merging galaxies.\n\nQuasars are found over a very broad range of distances (corresponding to redshifts of roughly 0.1 to 7), and quasar discovery surveys have demonstrated that quasar activity was more common in the distant past. The peak epoch of quasar activity in the Universe corresponds to redshifts around 2, or approximately 10 billion years ago. As of 2011, the most distant known quasar is at redshift z=7.085; light observed from this quasar was emitted when the Universe was only 770 million years old.\n\nBecause quasars are distant objects, any light which reaches the Earth is redshifted due to the metric expansion of space. Quasars inhabit the very center of active, young galaxies, and are among the most luminous, powerful, and energetic objects known in the universe, emitting up to a thousand times the energy output of the Milky Way, which contains 200–400 billion stars. This radiation is emitted across the electromagnetic spectrum, almost uniformly, from X-rays to the far-infrared with a peak in the ultraviolet-optical bands, with some quasars also being strong sources of radio emission and of gamma-rays.\n\nIn early optical images, quasars appeared as point sources, indistinguishable from stars, except for their peculiar spectra. With infrared telescopes and the Hubble Space Telescope, the \"host galaxies\" surrounding the quasars have been detected in some cases. These galaxies are normally too dim to be seen against the glare of the quasar, except with special techniques. Most quasars, with the exception of 3C 273 whose average apparent magnitude is 12.9, cannot be seen with small telescopes.\n\nThe luminosity of some quasars changes rapidly in the optical range and even more rapidly in the X-ray range. Because these changes occur very rapidly they define an upper limit on the volume of a quasar; quasars are not much larger than the Solar System. This implies an extremely high power density. The mechanism of brightness changes probably involves relativistic beaming of astrophysical jets pointed nearly directly toward Earth. The highest redshift quasar known () is ULAS J1120+0641, with a redshift of 7.085, which corresponds to a comoving distance of approximately 29 billion light-years from Earth (see more discussion of how cosmological distances can be greater than the light-travel time at metric expansion of space).\n\nQuasars are believed to be powered by accretion of material into supermassive black holes in the nuclei of distant galaxies, making these luminous versions of the general class of objects known as active galaxies. Since light cannot escape the black holes, the escaping energy is actually generated outside the event horizon by gravitational stresses and immense friction on the incoming material. Central masses of 10 to 10 solar masses have been measured in quasars by using reverberation mapping. Several dozen nearby large galaxies, with no sign of a quasar nucleus, have been shown to contain a similar central black hole in their nuclei, so it is thought that all large galaxies have one, but only a small fraction are active (with enough accretion to power radiation) and so are seen as quasars. The matter accreting onto the black hole is unlikely to fall directly in, but will have some angular momentum around the black hole that will cause the matter to collect into an accretion disc. Quasars may also be ignited or re-ignited when normal galaxies merge and the black hole is infused with a fresh source of matter. In fact, it has been suggested that a quasar could form as the Andromeda Galaxy collides with our own Milky Way galaxy in approximately 3–5 billion years.\n\nMore than 200,000 quasars are known, most from the Sloan Digital Sky Survey. All observed quasar spectra have redshifts between 0.056 and 7.085.\nApplying Hubble's law to these redshifts, it can be shown that they are between 600 million and 28.85 billion light-years away (in terms of comoving distance). Because of the great distances to the farthest quasars and the finite velocity of light, they and their surrounding space appear as they existed in the very early universe.\n\nThe power of quasars originates from supermassive black holes that are believed to exist at the core of all galaxies. The Doppler shifts of stars near the cores of galaxies indicate that they are rotating around tremendous masses with very steep gravity gradients, suggesting black holes.\n\nAlthough quasars appear faint when viewed from Earth, they are visible from extreme distances, being the most luminous objects in the known universe. The brightest quasar in the sky is 3C 273 in the constellation of Virgo. It has an average apparent magnitude of 12.8 (bright enough to be seen through a medium-size amateur telescope), but it has an absolute magnitude of −26.7. From a distance of about 33 light-years, this object would shine in the sky about as brightly as our sun. This quasar's luminosity is, therefore, about 4 trillion (4 × 10) times that of the Sun, or about 100 times that of the total light of giant galaxies like the Milky Way. This assumes the quasar is radiating energy in all directions, but the active galactic nucleus is believed to be radiating preferentially in the direction of its jet. In a universe containing hundreds of billions of galaxies, most of which had active nuclei billions of years ago but only seen today, it is statistically certain that thousands of energy jets should be pointed toward the Earth, some more directly than others. In many cases it is likely that the brighter the quasar, the more directly its jet is aimed at the Earth.\n\nThe hyperluminous quasar APM 08279+5255 was, when discovered in 1998, given an absolute magnitude of −32.2. High resolution imaging with the Hubble Space Telescope and the 10 m Keck Telescope revealed that this system is gravitationally lensed. A study of the gravitational lensing of this system suggests that the light emitted has been magnified by a factor of ~10. It is still substantially more luminous than nearby quasars such as 3C 273.\n\nQuasars were much more common in the early universe than they are today. This discovery by Maarten Schmidt in 1967 was early strong evidence against the Steady State cosmology of Fred Hoyle, and in favor of the Big Bang cosmology. Quasars show the locations where massive black holes are growing rapidly (via accretion). These black holes grow in step with the mass of stars in their host galaxy in a way not understood at present. One idea is that jets, radiation and winds created by the quasars, shut down the formation of new stars in the host galaxy, a process called 'feedback'. The jets that produce strong radio emission in some quasars at the centers of clusters of galaxies are known to have enough power to prevent the hot gas in those clusters from cooling and falling onto the central galaxy.\n\nQuasars' luminosities are variable, with time scales that range from months to hours. This means that quasars generate and emit their energy from a very small region, since each part of the quasar would have to be in contact with other parts on such a time scale as to allow the coordination of the luminosity variations. This would mean that a quasar varying on a time scale of a few weeks cannot be larger than a few light-weeks across. The emission of large amounts of power from a small region requires a power source far more efficient than the nuclear fusion that powers stars. The release of gravitational energy by matter falling towards a massive black hole is the only process known that can produce such high power continuously. Stellar explosions – supernovas and gamma-ray bursts – can do likewise, but only for a few weeks. Black holes were considered too exotic by some astronomers in the 1960s. They also suggested that the redshifts arose from some other (unknown) process, so that the quasars were not really so distant as the Hubble law implied. This \"redshift controversy\" lasted for many years. Many lines of evidence (optical viewing of host galaxies, finding 'intervening' absorption lines, gravitational lensing) now demonstrate that the quasar redshifts are due to the Hubble expansion, and quasars are in fact as powerful as first thought.\nQuasars have all the properties of other active galaxies such as Seyfert galaxies, but are more powerful: their radiation is partially 'nonthermal' (i.e., not due to black body radiation), and approximately 10 percent are observed to also have jets and lobes like those of radio galaxies that also carry significant (but poorly understood) amounts of energy in the form of particles moving at relativistic speeds. Extremely high energies might be explained by several mechanisms (see Fermi acceleration and Centrifugal mechanism of acceleration). Quasars can be detected over the entire observable electromagnetic spectrum including radio, infrared, visible light, ultraviolet, X-ray and even gamma rays. Most quasars are brightest in their rest-frame near-ultraviolet wavelength of 121.6 nm Lyman-alpha emission line of hydrogen, but due to the tremendous redshifts of these sources, that peak luminosity has been observed as far to the red as 900.0 nm, in the near infrared. A minority of quasars show strong radio emission, which is generated by jets of matter moving close to the speed of light. When viewed downward, these appear as blazars and often have regions that seem to move away from the center faster than the speed of light (superluminal expansion). This is an optical illusion due to the properties of special relativity.\n\nQuasar redshifts are measured from the strong spectral lines that dominate their visible and ultraviolet spectra. These lines are brighter than the continuous spectrum, so they are called 'emission' lines. They have widths of several percent of the speed of light. These widths are due to Doppler shifts caused by the high speeds of the gas emitting the lines. Fast motions strongly indicate a large mass. Emission lines of hydrogen (mainly of the Lyman series and Balmer series), helium, carbon, magnesium, iron and oxygen are the brightest lines. The atoms emitting these lines range from neutral to highly ionized, leaving it highly charged. This wide range of ionization shows that the gas is highly irradiated by the quasar, not merely hot, and not by stars, which cannot produce such a wide range of ionization.\n\n\"Iron quasars\" show strong emission lines resulting from low ionization iron (FeII), such as IRAS 18508-7815.\n\nSince quasars exhibit properties common to all active galaxies, the emission from quasars can be readily compared to those of smaller active galaxies powered by smaller supermassive black holes. To create a luminosity of 10 watts (the typical brightness of a quasar), a super-massive black hole would have to consume the material equivalent of 10 stars per year. The brightest known quasars devour 1000 solar masses of material every year. The largest known is estimated to consume matter equivalent to 600 Earths per minute. Quasar luminosities can vary considerably over time, depending on their surroundings. Since it is difficult to fuel quasars for many billions of years, after a quasar finishes accreting the surrounding gas and dust, it becomes an ordinary galaxy.\n\nQuasars also provide some clues as to the end of the Big Bang's reionization. The oldest known quasars (redshift ≥ 6) display a Gunn-Peterson trough and have absorption regions in front of them indicating that the intergalactic medium at that time was neutral gas. More recent quasars show no absorption region but rather their spectra contain a spiky area known as the Lyman-alpha forest; this indicates that the intergalactic medium has undergone reionization into plasma, and that neutral gas exists only in small clouds.\n\nQuasars show evidence of elements heavier than helium, indicating that galaxies underwent a massive phase of star formation, creating population III stars between the time of the Big Bang and the first observed quasars. Light from these stars may have been observed in 2005 using NASA's Spitzer Space Telescope, although this observation remains to be confirmed.\n\nLike all (unobscured) active galaxies, quasars can be strong X-ray sources. Radio-loud quasars can also produce X-rays and gamma rays by inverse Compton scattering of lower-energy photons by the radio-emitting electrons in the jet.\n\nThe first quasars (3C 48 and 3C 273) were discovered in the late 1950s, as radio sources in all-sky radio surveys. They were first noted as radio sources with no corresponding visible object. Using small telescopes and the Lovell Telescope as an interferometer, they were shown to have a very small angular size. Hundreds of these objects were recorded by 1960 and published in the Third Cambridge Catalogue as astronomers scanned the skies for their optical counterparts. In 1963, a definite identification of the radio source 3C 48 with an optical object was published by Allan Sandage and Thomas A. Matthews. Astronomers had detected what appeared to be a faint blue star at the location of the radio source and obtained its spectrum. Containing many unknown broad emission lines, the anomalous spectrum defied interpretation — a claim by John Bolton of a large redshift was not generally accepted.\n\nIn 1962 a breakthrough was achieved. Another radio source, 3C 273, was predicted to undergo five occultations by the Moon. Measurements taken by Cyril Hazard and John Bolton during one of the occultations using the Parkes Radio Telescope allowed Maarten Schmidt to optically identify the object and obtain an optical spectrum using the 200-inch Hale Telescope on Mount Palomar. This spectrum revealed the same strange emission lines. Schmidt realized that these were actually spectral lines of hydrogen redshifted at the rate of 15.8 percent. This discovery showed that 3C 273 was receding at a rate of 47,000 km/s. This discovery revolutionized quasar observation and allowed other astronomers to find redshifts from the emission lines from other radio sources. As predicted earlier by Bolton, 3C 48 was found to have a redshift of 37% of the speed of light.\n\nThe term \"quasar\" was coined by Chinese-born U.S. astrophysicist Hong-Yee Chiu in May 1964, in \"Physics Today\", to describe these puzzling objects:\n\nLater it was found that not all quasars have strong radio emission; in fact only about 10% are \"radio-loud\". Hence the name 'QSO' (quasi-stellar object) is used (in addition to \"quasar\") to refer to these objects, including the 'radio-loud' and the 'radio-quiet' classes. The discovery of the quasar had large implications for the field of astronomy in the 1960s, including drawing physics and astronomy closer together.\n\nOne great topic of debate during the 1960s was whether quasars were nearby objects or distant objects as implied by their redshift. It was suggested, for example, that the redshift of quasars was not due to the expansion of space but rather to light escaping a deep gravitational well. However a star of sufficient mass to form such a well would be unstable and in excess of the Hayashi limit. Quasars also show forbidden spectral emission lines which were previously only seen in hot gaseous nebulae of low density, which would be too diffuse to both generate the observed power and fit within a deep gravitational well. There were also serious concerns regarding the idea of cosmologically distant quasars. One strong argument against them was that they implied energies that were far in excess of known energy conversion processes, including nuclear fusion. At this time, there were some suggestions that quasars were made of some hitherto unknown form of stable antimatter and that this might account for their brightness. Others speculated that quasars were a white hole end of a wormhole. However, when accretion disc energy-production mechanisms were successfully modeled in the 1970s, the argument that quasars were too luminous became moot and today the cosmological distance of quasars is accepted by almost all researchers.\n\nIn 1979 the gravitational lens effect predicted by Einstein's General Theory of Relativity was confirmed observationally for the first time with images of the double quasar 0957+561.\n\nIn the 1980s, unified models were developed in which quasars were classified as a particular kind of active galaxy, and a consensus emerged that in many cases it is simply the viewing angle that distinguishes them from other classes, such as blazars and radio galaxies. The huge luminosity of quasars results from the accretion discs of central supermassive black holes, which can convert on the order of 10% of the mass of an object into energy as compared to 0.7% for the p-p chain nuclear fusion process that dominates the energy production in Sun-like stars.\n\nThis mechanism also explains why quasars were more common in the early universe, as this energy production ends when the supermassive black hole consumes all of the gas and dust near it. This means that it is possible that most galaxies, including the Milky Way, have gone through an active stage, appearing as a quasar or some other class of active galaxy that depended on the black hole mass and the accretion rate, and are now quiescent because they lack a supply of matter to feed into their central black holes to generate radiation.\n\nBecause quasars are extremely distant, bright, and small in apparent size, they are useful reference points in establishing a measurement grid on the sky.\nThe International Celestial Reference System (ICRS) is based on hundreds of extra-galactic radio sources, mostly quasars, distributed around the entire sky. Because they are so distant, they are apparently stationary to our current technology, yet their positions can be measured with the utmost accuracy by Very Long Baseline Interferometry (VLBI). The positions of most are known to 0.001 arcsecond or better, which is orders of magnitude more precise than the best optical measurements.\n\nA multiple-image quasar is a quasar whose light undergoes gravitational lensing, resulting in double, triple or quadruple images of the same quasar. The first such gravitational lens to be discovered was the double-imaged quasar Q0957+561 (or Twin Quasar) in 1979. A grouping of two or more quasars can result from a chance alignment, physical proximity, actual close physical interaction, or effects of gravity bending the light of a single quasar into two or more images.\n\nAs quasars are rare objects, the probability of three or more separate quasars being found near the same location is very low. The first true triple quasar was found in 2007 by observations at the W. M. Keck Observatory Mauna Kea, Hawaii. LBQS 1429-008 (or QQQ J1432−0106) was first observed in 1989 and was found to be a double quasar; itself a rare occurrence. When astronomers discovered the third member, they confirmed that the sources were separate and not the result of gravitational lensing. This triple quasar has a red shift of \"z\" = 2.076, which is equivalent to 10.5 billion light years. The\ncomponents are separated by an estimated 30–50 kpc, which is typical of interacting galaxies. An example of a triple quasar that is formed by lensing is PG1115 +08.\n\nIn 2013, the second true triplet quasars QQQ J1519+0627 was found with redshift \"z\" = 1.51 (approx 9 billion light years) by an international team of astronomers led by Farina of the University of Insubria, the whole system is well accommodated within 25′′ (i.e., 200 kpc in projected distance). The team accessed data from observations collected at the La Silla Observatory with the New Technology Telescope (NTT) of the European Southern Observatory (ESO) and at the Calar Alto Observatory with the 3.5m telescope of the Centro Astronómico Hispano\nAlemán (CAHA).\n\nThe first quadruple quasar was discovered in 2015.\n\nWhen two quasars are so nearly in the same direction as seen from Earth that they appear to be a single quasar but may be separated by the use of telescopes, they are referred to as a \"double quasar\", such as the Twin Quasar. These are two different quasars, and not the same quasar that is gravitationally lensed. This configuration is similar to the optical double star. Two quasars, a \"quasar pair\", may be closely related in time and space, and be gravitationally bound to one another. These may take the form of two quasars in the same galaxy cluster. This configuration is similar to two prominent stars in a star cluster. A \"binary quasar\", may be closely linked gravitationally and form a pair of interacting galaxies. This configuration is similar to that of a binary star system.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "25240", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25240", "title": "Quinquagesima", "text": "Quinquagesima\n\nQuinquagesima is one of the names used in the Western Church for the Sunday before Ash Wednesday. It is also called Quinquagesima Sunday, Quinquagesimae, Estomihi, Shrove Sunday, or the Sunday next before Lent.\n\nThe name Quinquagesima originates from Latin \"quinquagesimus\" (fiftieth). This is in reference to the fifty days before Easter Day using inclusive counting which counts both Sundays (normal counting would count only one of these). Since the forty days of the Lent do not include Sundays, the first day of Lent, Ash Wednesday, succeeds Quinquagesima Sunday by only three days. \n\nThe name Estomihi is derived from the incipit or opening words of the Introit for the Sunday, \"Esto mihi in Deum protectorem, et in locum refugii, ut salvum me facias\", (\"Be Thou unto me a God, a Protector, and a place of refuge, to save me\") .\n\nThe earliest Quinquagesima Sunday can occur is February 1 and the latest is March 7.\n\nIn the Roman Catholic Church, the terms for this Sunday (and the two immediately before it — Sexagesima and Septuagesima Sundays) were eliminated in the reforms following the Second Vatican Council, and these Sundays are part of Ordinary Time.\n\nAccording to the reformed Roman Rite Roman Catholic calendar, this Sunday is now known by its number within Ordinary Time — fourth through ninth, depending upon the date of Easter. The earlier form of the Roman Rite, with its references to Quinquagesima Sunday, and to the Sexagesima and Septuagesima Sundays, continues to be observed in some communities.\n\nIn traditional lectionaries, the Sunday concentrates on , \"Jesus took the twelve aside and said, 'Lo, we go to Jerusalem, and everything written by the prophets about the Son of Man shall be fulfilled' ... The disciples, however, understood none of this,\" which from verse 35 is followed by Luke's version of Healing the blind near Jericho. The passage presages the themes of Lent and Holy Week.\n\nThis Sunday has different names in the two different calendars used in the Church of England: in the \"Book of Common Prayer\" calendar (1662) this Sunday is known as \"Quinquagesima\", while in the \"Common Worship\" calendar (2000) it is known as the \"Sunday next before Lent\". In this latter calendar it is part of the period of Ordinary Time that falls between the feasts of the Presentation of Christ in the Temple (the end of the Epiphany season) and Ash Wednesday.\n\nIn the Revised Common Lectionary the Sunday before Lent is designated \"Transfiguration Sunday\", and the gospel reading is the story of the Transfiguration of Jesus from Matthew, Mark, or Luke. Some churches whose lectionaries derive from the RCL, e.g. the Church of England, use these readings but do not designate the Sunday \"Transfiguration Sunday\".\n\nIn the Eastern Orthodox Church, its equivalent, the Sunday before Great Lent, is called \"Forgiveness Sunday\", \"Maslenitsa Sunday\", or \"Cheesefare Sunday\". The latter name comes because this Sunday concludes Maslenitsa, the week in which butter and cheese may be eaten, which are prohibited during Great Lent. The former name derives from the fact that this Sunday is followed by a special Vespers called \"Forgiveness Vespers\" which opens Great Lent.\nOn this day the Eastern Orthodox Church Christians at the liturgy listen to the Gospel speaking of forgiveness of sins, fasting, and the gathering of treasures in heaven. On this day, all Orthodox Christians ask each other for forgiveness to begin the Great Lent with a good heart, to focus on the spiritual life, to purify the heart from sin in confession, and to meet Easter - the day of the Resurrection of Jesus with a pure heart.\nThis is the last day before Lent when non-lenten food is eaten.\n\nIn Lutheranism is combined with (Paul's praise of love).\n\nComposers writing cantatas for Estomihi Sunday include:\n\n"}
{"id": "25241", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25241", "title": "Quassia", "text": "Quassia\n\nQuassia ( or ) is a flora genus in the family Simaroubaceae. Its size is disputed; some botanists treat it as consisting of only one species, \"Quassia amara\" from tropical South America, while others treat it in a wide circumscription as a pantropical genus containing up to 40 species of trees and shrubs. The genus was named after a former slave from Surinam, Graman Quassi in the eighteenth century. He discovered the medicinal properties of the bark of \"Quassia amara\".\n\nBroader treatments of the genus include the following and other species:\n\nIt is the source of the quassinoids quassin and neo-quassin.\n\n"}
{"id": "25243", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25243", "title": "Quisling", "text": "Quisling\n\nA quisling (; ) is a term originating from Norway, which is used in Scandinavian languages and in English for a person who collaborates with an enemy occupying force – or more generally as a synonym for traitor. The word originates from the surname of the Norwegian war-time leader Vidkun Quisling, who headed a domestic Nazi collaborationist regime during the Second World War.\n\nUse of Quisling's surname as a term predates the Second World War. The first recorded use of the term was by Norwegian Labour Party politician Oscar Torp in a 2 January 1933 newspaper interview, where he used it as a general term for followers of Vidkun Quisling. Quisling was at this point in the process of establishing the Nasjonal Samling (National Unity) party, a fascist party modelled on the German Nazi Party. Further uses of the term were made by Aksel Sandemose, in a newspaper article in \"Dagbladet\" in 1934, and by the newspaper \"Vestfold Arbeiderblad\", in 1936.\n\nThe use of the name as a term for collaborators or traitors in general probably came about upon Quisling's unsuccessful coup d'etat in 1940, when he attempted to seize power and make Norway cease resisting the invading Germans. The term was widely introduced to an English-speaking audience by the British newspaper \"The Times\". It published an editorial on the 19th April 1940 titled \"Quislings everywhere\", in which it was asserted that \"To writers, the word Quisling is a gift from the gods. If they had been ordered to invent a new word for traitor... they could hardly have hit upon a more brilliant combination of letters. Aurally it contrives to suggest something at once slippery and tortuous.\" The \"Daily Mail\" picked up the term four days after \"The Times\" editorial was published. In the article \"The War Illustrated\" \"potential Quislings\" among the Dutch during the German invasion of the Netherlands were mentioned. Subsequently, the BBC brought the word into common use internationally.\n\nThe then Prime Minister of the United Kingdom Winston Churchill used the term during an address to the Allied Delegates at St. James's Palace on 21 June 1941, when he said: \"A vile race of Quislings—to use a new word which will carry the scorn of mankind down the centuries—is hired to fawn upon the conqueror, to collaborate in his designs and to enforce his rule upon their fellow countrymen while grovelling low themselves.\" He used the term again in an address to both houses of Congress in the United States of America on 26 December 1941. Commenting upon the effect of a number of Allied victories against Axis forces, and moreover the United States’ decision to enter the war, Churchill opined: \"Hope has returned to the hearts of scores of millions of men and women, and with that hope there burns the flame of anger against the brutal, corrupt invader. And still more fiercely burn the fires of hatred and contempt for the filthy Quislings whom he has suborned.\" The term subsequently entered the language and became a target for political cartoonists.\n\nIn the United States it was used often. Some examples include: In the Warner Bros. cartoon \"Tom Turk and Daffy\" (1944) it was uttered by a Thanksgiving turkey whose presence is betrayed to Porky Pig by Daffy Duck. In the American film \"Edge of Darkness\" (1943), about the Resistance in Norway, the heroine's brother is often described as a quisling.\n\nThe back-formed verb, \"to quisle\" () existed. This back-formed verb gave rise to a much less common version of the noun: \"quisler\".\n\nHowever, H. L. Mencken (generally considered to be a leading authority on the common English usage in the United States) even in 1944 appeared not to be aware of the existence of the verb form, and \"to quisle\" has largely disappeared from contemporary usage.\n\n\"Quisling\" was applied to some Communist figures who participated in the establishment of Communist regimes. As an illustration, the renegade socialist Zdeněk Fierlinger of Czechoslovakia was frequently derided as \"Quislinger\" for his collaboration with the Communist Party of Czechoslovakia.\n\nThe noun has survived into the 21st century and is still in some use. It appeared in 2008 and 2009 in articles in \"The New York Times\", \"Die Zeit\" and \"The Times\". In 2016 \"The Federalist\" asked \"Is Donald Trump A Russian Quisling?\" while \"Politico\", \"The Hill\", and other journals also resurrected the term that year in analyzing contemporary American politics.\n\n\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "25244", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25244", "title": "Quadrangle", "text": "Quadrangle\n\nQuadrangle or The Quadrangle may refer to :\n\n"}
{"id": "25247", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25247", "title": "Quill", "text": "Quill\n\nA quill pen is a writing implement made from a moulted flight feather (preferably a primary wing-feather) of a large bird. Quills were used for writing with ink before the invention of the dip pen, the metal-nibbed pen, the fountain pen, and, eventually, the ballpoint pen. The hand-cut goose quill is rarely used as a calligraphy tool, because many papers are now derived from wood pulp and wear down the quill very quickly. However, it is still the tool of choice for a few professionals and provides an unmatched sharp stroke as well as greater flexibility than a steel pen. \n\nIn a carefully prepared quill the slit does not widen through wetting and drying with ink. It will retain its shape adequately and only requires infrequent sharpening and can be used time and time again until there is little left of it. The hollow shaft of the feather (the \"calamus\") acts as an ink reservoir and ink flows to the tip by capillary action. \n\nThe strongest quills come from the primary flight feathers discarded by birds during their annual moult. Generally the left wing (it is supposed) is favored by the right-handed majority of writers because the feather curves away from the sight line, over the back of the hand. The quill barrel is cut to six or seven inches in length, so no such consideration of curvature or 'sight-line' is necessary. Additionally, writing with the left-hand in the long era of the quill was discouraged, and quills were never sold as left and right-handed, only by their size and species. \n\nGoose feathers are most commonly used; scarcer, more expensive swan feathers are used for larger lettering. Depending on availability and strength of the feather, as well as quality and characteristic of the line wanted by the writer, other feathers used for quill-pen making include feathers from the crow, eagle, owl, hawk, and turkey. On a true quill the barbs are always stripped off completely on the trailing edge. (The pinion for example only has significant barbs on one side of the barrel.) Later a fashion developed for stripping partially and leaving a decorative top of a few barbs. The fancy, fully plumed quill is mostly a Hollywood invention and has little basis in reality. Most, if not all, manuscript illustrations of scribes show a quill devoid of decorative barbs, or at least mostly stripped.\n\nQuill pens were used to write the vast majority of medieval manuscripts, the Magna Carta and the Declaration of Independence. \nQuill pens are still used today mainly by professional scribes and calligraphers.\n\nQuills are also used as the plectrum material in string instruments, particularly the harpsichord.\n\nQuills were the primary writing instrument in the western world from the 6th to the 19th century. The best quills were usually made from goose, swan, and later turkey feathers. Quills went into decline after the invention of the metal pen, mass production beginning in Great Britain as early as 1822 by John Mitchell of Birmingham.\n\nQuill pens were the instrument of choice during the medieval era due to their compatibility with parchment and vellum. Prior to this the reed pen had been used, but a finer letter was achieved on animal skin using a cured quill. Other than written text, they were often used to create figures, decorations, and images on manuscripts, although many illuminators and painters preferred fine brushes for their work. The variety of different strokes in formal hands was accomplished by good penmanship as the tip was square cut and rigid, exactly as it is today with modern steel pens.\n\nIt was much later, in the 1600s, with the increased popularity of writing, especially in the copperplate script promoted by the many printed manuals available from the 'Writing Masters', that quills became more pointed and flexible.\n\nAccording to the Supreme Court Historical Society, 20 goose-quill pens, neatly crossed, are placed at the four counsel tables each day the U.S. Supreme Court is in session; \"most lawyers appear before the Court only once, and gladly take the quills home as souvenirs.\" This has been done since the earliest sessions of the Court.\n\nQuills are denominated from the order in which they are fixed in the wing; the first is favoured by the expert calligrapher, the second and third quills being very satisfactory also, plus the pinion feather. Flags the 5th and 6th feathers are also used. No other feather on the wing would be considered suitable by a professional scribe.\n\nInformation can be obtained on the techniques of curing and cutting quills\n\nIn order to harden a quill that is soft, thrust the barrel into hot ashes, stirring it till it is soft; then taking it out, press it almost flat upon your knees with the back of a penknife, and afterwards reduce it to a roundness with your fingers. If you have a number to harden, set water and alum over the fire; and while it is boiling put in a handful of quills, the barrels only, for a minute, and then lay them by.\n\nAn accurate account of the Victorian process by William Bishop, from researches with one of the last London quill dressers, is recorded in the \"Calligrapher's Handbook\" cited on this page.\n\nA quill knife was the original primary tool used for cutting and sharpening quills, known as \"dressing\".\n\nFollowing the decline of the quill in the 1820s, after the introduction of the maintenance-free, mass-produced steel dip nib by John Mitchell, knives were still manufactured but became known as desk knives, stationery knives or latterly as the name stuck \"pen\" knives. \n\nA \"pen\" knife by contrast has two flat sides. This distinction is not recognised by modern traders, dealers or collectors who define a quill knife as any small knife with a fixed or hinged blade, including such items as ornamental fruit knives.\n\nPlectra for psalteries and lutes can be cut similarly to writing pens. The rachis, the portion of the stem between the barbs, not the calamus, of the primary flight feathers of birds of the crow family was preferred for harpsichords. In modern instruments, plastic is more common, but they are often still called \"quills\". The lesiba uses a quill attached to a string to produce sound.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "25248", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25248", "title": "Quo vadis?", "text": "Quo vadis?\n\nQuo vadis? (, ) is a Latin phrase meaning \"Where are you going?\"\n\nThe modern usage of the phrase refers to a Christian tradition regarding Saint Peter. According to the apocryptal Acts of Peter (Vercelli Acts XXXV), Peter flees from crucifixion in Rome at the hands of the government, and along the road outside the city, he meets the risen Jesus. In the Latin translation, Peter asks Jesus, \"\"Quo vadis?\"\" He replies, \"\"Romam eo iterum crucifigi\" (\"I am going to Rome to be crucified again\"). Peter then gains the courage to continue his ministry and returns to the city, where he is martyred by being crucified upside-down. The Church of Domine Quo Vadis in Rome is built where, according to legend, the meeting between Peter and Jesus took place.\n\nThe words \"quo vadis\" as a question also occur five times in the Latin Vulgate: in Genesis 16:8, Genesis 32:17, Judges 19:17, John 13:36, and John 16:5.\n\nThe Polish writer Henryk Sienkiewicz authored the novel \"Quo Vadis: A Narrative of the Time of Nero\" (1895), which in turn has been made into motion pictures several times, including a 1951 version that was nominated for eight Academy Awards. For this and other novels, Sienkiewicz received the 1905 Nobel Prize for Literature.\n\nIn the Academy Award winning film \"Alice Doesn't Live Here Anymore\", Ellen Burstyn's character says the phrase before a job interview at \"Club Manhattan\".\n\n"}
{"id": "25249", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25249", "title": "QED", "text": "QED\n\nQED may refer to:\n\n\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "25254", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25254", "title": "Qantas", "text": "Qantas\n\nQantas Airways ( ; ) is the flag carrier airline of Australia and its largest airline by fleet size, international flights and international destinations. It is the third oldest airline in the world, after KLM and Avianca having been founded in November 1920; it began international passenger flights in May 1935. The Qantas name comes from \"\"QANTAS\"\", an acronym for its original name, \"\"Queensland and Northern Territory Aerial Services\"\", and it is nicknamed \"The Flying Kangaroo\". Qantas is a founding member of the Oneworld airline alliance.\n\nThe airline is based in the Sydney suburb of Mascot with its main hub at Sydney Airport. , Qantas had a 65% share of the Australian domestic market and carried 14.9% of all passengers travelling in and out of Australia. Various subsidiary airlines operate to regional centres and on some trunk routes within Australia under the QantasLink banner. Its subsidiary Jetconnect provides services between Australia and New Zealand, flying under the Qantas brand. Qantas also owns Jetstar Airways, a low-cost airline that operates both international services from Australia and domestic services within Australia and New Zealand; and holds stakes in a number of other Jetstar-branded airlines.\n\nQantas was founded in Winton, Queensland on 16 November 1920 as Queensland and Northern Territory Aerial Services Limited. The airline's first aircraft was an Avro 504K. In 1920 Queensland and Northern Territory Aerial Services Ltd had its headquarters in Winton before moving to Longreach, Queensland in 1921 and Brisbane in 1930.\n\nIn 1934, QANTAS and Britain's Imperial Airways (a forerunner of British Airways) formed a new company, Qantas Empire Airways Limited (QEA). The new airline commenced operations in December 1934, flying between Brisbane and Darwin. QEA flew internationally from May 1935, when the service from Darwin was extended to Singapore (Imperial Airways operated the rest of the service through to London). After World War II began, enemy action and accidents destroyed half of the fleet of ten, when most of the fleet was taken over by the Australian government for war service.\n\nFlying boat services were resumed in 1943, with flights between Swan River, Perth and Koggala lake in Ceylon (now Sri Lanka). This linked up with the British Overseas Airways Corporation (BOAC, the successor airline to Imperial Airways) service to London. Qantas' kangaroo logo was first used on the \"Kangaroo Route\", begun in 1944, from Sydney to Karachi, where BOAC crews took over for the rest of the journey to the UK.\n\nIn 1947, QEA was nationalised by the Australian government led by Labor Prime Minister Ben Chifley. QANTAS Limited was then wound up. After nationalisation, Qantas' remaining domestic network, in Queensland, was transferred to the also nationally owned Trans Australia Airlines, leaving Qantas with a purely international network. Shortly after nationalisation, QEA began its first services outside the British Empire – to Tokyo. Services to Hong Kong began around the same time. In 1957 a head office, Qantas House, opened in Sydney. In June 1959 Qantas entered the jet age when the first Boeing 707-138 was delivered.\n\nOn , Qantas merged with nationally owned domestic airline, Australian Airlines (renamed from Trans Australia Airlines in 1986). The airline started to be rebranded to Qantas in the following year. Qantas was gradually privatised between 1993 and 1997. Under the legislation passed to allow the privatisation, Qantas must be at least 51% owned by Australian shareholders.\n\nIn 1998, Qantas co-founded the oneworld alliance with American Airlines, British Airways, Canadian Airlines, and Cathay Pacific, with other airlines joining subsequently.\n\nThe main domestic competitor to Qantas, Ansett Australia, collapsed on 14 September 2001. Market share for Qantas immediately neared 90%, but with the entry of new budget airline Virgin Blue into the domestic market, Qantas' market share fell. Qantas created the budget Jetstar Airways in 2001 to compete, and the market share of the Qantas Group settled at a relatively stable position of about 65%, with 30% for Virgin Blue and other regional airlines accounting for the rest of the market.\n\nQantas briefly revived the Australian Airlines name for a short-lived international budget airline between 2002 and 2006, but this subsidiary was shut down in favour of expanding Jetstar internationally, including to New Zealand. In 2004, the Qantas group expanded into the Asian budget airline market with Jetstar Asia Airways, in which Qantas owns a minority stake. A similar model was used for the investment into Jetstar Pacific, headquartered in Vietnam, in 2007, and Jetstar Japan, launched in 2012.\n\nIn December 2006, Qantas was the subject of a failed bid from a consortium calling itself Airline Partners Australia. Merger talks with British Airways in 2008 also did not proceed to an agreement. In 2011, an industrial relations dispute between Qantas and the Transport Workers Union of Australia resulted in the grounding of all Qantas aircraft and lock-out of the airline's staff for two days.\n\nThe key trends for the Qantas Group (Qantas Airways Ltd and Controlled Entities, which includes Jetstar and Qantas Cargo), are shown below (as at year ending 30 June):\n\nQantas' headquarters are located at the Qantas Centre in the Bayside Council suburb of Mascot, Sydney, New South Wales.\n\nQantas has operated a number of passenger airline subsidiaries since inception, including: \n\nQantas operates a freight service under the name Qantas Freight and also wholly owns the logistics and air freight company Australian air Express and leases cargo aircraft from Atlas Air.\n\nQantas, through its Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Programme, has some links with the Aboriginal Australian community. As of 2007, the company has run the programme for more than ten years and 1–2% of its staff are Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander. Qantas employs a full-time Diversity Coordinator, who is responsible for the programme.\n\nQantas has also bought and donated some Aboriginal art. In 1993, the airline bought a painting — \"Honey Ant and Grasshopper Dreaming\" — from the Central Australian desert region. As of 2007, this painting is on permanent loan to Yiribana at the Art Gallery of New South Wales. In 1996, Qantas donated five extra bark paintings to the gallery. Qantas has also sponsored and supported Aboriginal artists in the past.\n\nAn early television campaign, starting in 1969 and running for several decades, was aimed at American audiences; it featured a live koala, voiced by Howard Morris, who complained that too many tourists were coming to Australia and concluded \"I hate Qantas.\" The koala ads have been ranked among the greatest commercials of all time. A long-running advertising campaign features renditions by children's choirs of Peter Allen's \"I Still Call Australia Home\", at various famous landmarks in Australia and foreign locations such as Venice.\n\nQantas is the main sponsor of the Qantas Wallabies, the Australian national Rugby Union team. It also sponsors the Socceroos, Australia's national association football team. Qantas is the main sponsor for the Formula One Australian Grand Prix. On 26 December 2011, Qantas signed a four-year deal with Australian cricket's governing body Cricket Australia, to be the official carrier of the Australia national cricket team.\n\nQantas management has expressed strong support for Marriage Equality and LGBTIQ issues, with CEO Alan Joyce said to be, \"arguably the most prominent corporate voice in the marriage equality campaign.\" As official airline partner for the Sydney Mardi Gras, Qantas decorated one of its aircraft with rainbow wording and positioned a rainbow flag next to the tail’s flying kangaroo. Qantas also served pride cookies to its passengers. It had a rainbow roo float in the Mardi Gras parade. There has been criticism of Qantas using its corporate power to prosecute the private interests on their staff and the community. Peter Dutton has said that chief executives such as Alan Joyce at Qantas should \"stick to their knitting\" rather than using the company's brand to advocate for political causes. A senior church leader has made similar comments. Despite the criticism, Qantas will continue to advocate for marriage equality which will include offering customers specially commissioned rings with the phrase, \"until we all belong\". This phrase will also appear on, Qantas boarding passes and other paraphernalia. The cost of the campaign by Qantas and other participating companies is expected to be more than $5 million.\n\nThe \"Qantas Sale Act\", under which the airline was privatised, limits foreign ownership of Qantas to 49 percent. Foreign airlines are subject to further restrictions under the act, which stipulates a 35-percent limit for all foreign airline shareholdings combined. In addition, a single foreign entity can hold no more than 25 percent of the airline's shares. This act was amended in 2014 to repeal parts of paragraph 7.\n\nIn August 2011 the company announced that, due to financial losses and a decline in market share, major structural changes would be made. Up to 1,000 jobs would be lost in Australia, and a new Asia-based premium airline would be set up, operating under a different name. It would also launch a budget airline, called Jetstar Japan, in partnership with Japan Airlines and Mitsubishi Corporation. The change became necessary because of losses in the airline's international operations, due to airlines such as Emirates and Singapore Airlines becoming more competitive and because of the deregulation of Australian international routes during the mid-to-late 1980s. Included in the changes was the cessation of services to London via Hong Kong and Bangkok; Qantas still operated to these cities, but with onward flights to London via its Oneworld partner British Airways under a code-share service.\n\nQantas is attempting to turn around its international operations, which lost about A$200 million ($209 million) for the year ending June 2011. Therefore, on 26 March 2012, Qantas announced it would set up Jetstar Hong Kong with China Eastern Airlines Corporation, which was intended to begin flights in 2013, but became embroiled in a protracted approval process.\n\nDue to high fuel prices, intense competition and industrial disputes, Qantas reported a A$245 million full-year loss to the end of June 2012, which was its first loss since Qantas was fully privatised 17 years previously, in 1995, and led to the airline cancelling its order of 35 new Boeing 787 Dreamliner aircraft, to reduce its spending. In focusing on core business, Qantas also divested itself of its 50% holding of StarTrack, Australia's largest road freight company, in part for acquiring full interest in Australian Air Express.\n\nQantas and Emirates began their alliance on 31 March 2013, in which their combined carriers offered 98 flights per week to Dubai, that saw bookings up six-fold. To accommodate Muslim sensitivities, the airline stopped serving pork on flights bound to/from Europe, which provoked a backlash on social media. In September that year, following the announcement the carrier expected an A$250 million ( million) net loss for the half-year period that ended on 31 December and the implementation of cost-cutting measures that would see the cut of 1,000 jobs within a year, S&P downgraded Qantas credit from BBB- (the lowest investment grade) to BB+, which may imply a rise in borrowing costs and a limitation in the investment potential. Moody's applied a similar downgrading a month later.\n\nThe Qantas Group reported a loss of A$235 million ( million) for the first half of FY 2014. Cost-cutting measures to save A$2 billion, including the loss of 5,000 jobs that will see the workforce lowered from 32,000 to 27,000 by 2017, were announced in . In May 2014 the company said it would have shed 2,200 jobs by June 2014, including those of 100 pilots. The carrier also reduced the size of its fleet by retiring aircraft and deferring deliveries; and planned to sell some of its assets. With 2,200 employees laid off by June 2014, another 1,800 job positions were expected to be cut by June 2015.\n\nQantas sold its lease of Terminal 3 at Sydney Airport, which was due to continue until 2019, back to Sydney Airport Corporation for $535 million. This means Sydney Airport resumes operational responsibility of the terminal, including the lucrative retail areas.\n\nParis-based Australian designer Martin Grant is responsible for the new Qantas airline staff uniforms that were publicly unveiled on 16 April 2013. These were to replace the previous uniforms, dubbed colloquially as \"Morrisey\" by staff after the designer, Peter Morrissey. Qantas ambassador and model Miranda Kerr assisted with the launch of the new outfits for which the colours of navy blue, red and fuchsia pink are combined. Qantas chief executive Alan Joyce stated that the new design \"speaks of Australian style on the global stage\" at the launch event that involved Qantas employees modelling the uniforms. Grant consulted with Qantas staff members over the course of one year to finalise the 35 styles that were eventually created. Not all employees were happy with the new uniform, however, with one flight attendant being quoted as saying \"The uniforms are really tight and they are simply not practical for the very physical job we have to do.\"\n\nQantas flies to 20 domestic destinations and 21 international destinations in 14 countries across Africa, the Americas, Asia, Europe and Oceania excluding the destinations served by its subsidiaries. The entire Qantas group serves 65 domestic and 31 international destinations.\n\nQantas operates flightseeing charters to Antarctica on behalf of Croydon Travel. It first flew Antarctic flightseeing trips in 1977. They were suspended for a number of years due to the crash of Air New Zealand Flight 901 on Mount Erebus in 1979. Qantas restarted the flights in 1994. Although these flights do not touch down, they require specific polar operations and crew training due to factors like sector whiteout, which contributed to the 1979 Air New Zealand disaster.\n\nWith non-stop service between Sydney and Dallas/Fort Worth aboard the Airbus A380 starting on 29 September 2014, Qantas operated the world's longest passenger flight on the world's largest passenger aircraft. This was overtaken by Emirates' Auckland-Dubai flight, which started on 1 March 2016. After the Boeing 787 aircraft are delivered, Qantas has announced an intention to launch non-stop flights between Australia and the United Kingdom in 2018 from Perth, Western Australia to London.\n\nQantas has codeshare agreements with the following airlines:\nAs of July 2017, the Qantas mainline fleet consists of the following aircraft:\n\n, Qantas and its subsidiaries operate 285 aircraft, which includes 72 aircraft by Jetstar Airways, 82 by the various QantasLink-branded airlines, 8 by Jetconnect and 5 by Express Freighters Australia (on behalf of Qantas Freight, which also wet leases three Atlas Air Boeing 747-400Fs).\n\nOn 22 August 2012, Qantas announced that, due to losses and to conserve capital, it had cancelled its 35-aircraft Boeing 787–9 order while keeping the 15-aircraft 787-8 order for Jetstar Airways and moving forward 50 purchase rights. On 20 August 2015 Qantas announced that it had ordered eight Boeing 787-9s for delivery from 2017.\n\nOn 27 October 2016, Qantas revealed revamped 787 interiors as well as a new livery for the airline, featuring a new typeface and streamlined logo.\n\nQantas has named its aircraft since 1926. Themes have included Greek gods, stars, people in Australian aviation history, and Australian birds. Since 1959, the majority of Qantas aircraft have been named after Australian cities. The Airbus A380 series, the flagship of the airline, is named after Australian aviation pioneers, with the first A380 named \"Nancy-Bird Walton\".\n\nTwo Qantas Boeing 737-800s are decorated with Indigenous Australian art schemes designed by Indigenous Australian artists. The first scheme is titled \"Yananyi Dreaming\" and features a depiction of Uluru. The scheme was designed by Uluru-based artist Rene Kulitja, in collaboration with Balarinji Studio in Adelaide. It was painted on the 737 at the Boeing factory prior to its delivery in 2002.\n\nA second 737–800 in Indigenous Australian art livery, called \"Mendoowoorrji\", was revealed in November 2013. The design was drawn from the late West Australian Aboriginal artist Paddy Bedford.\n\nTwo other Australian Aboriginal art designs have been displayed on Qantas aircraft. Two Boeing 747s (a −400 and later a −400ER) were adorned in a paint scheme called \"Wunala Dreaming\". \"Wunala Dreaming\" was the first Australian Aboriginal art scheme and was unveiled in 1994. The \"motif\" was an overall-red design depicting ancestral spirits in the form of kangaroos travelling in the outback. The second design was called \"Nalanji Dreaming\" and was painted on one of the airline's now-retired Boeing 747-300s in 1995. \"Nalanji Dreaming\" was a bright blue design inspired by rainforest landscape and tropical seas.\n\nIn November 2014 the airline revealed that the 75th Boeing 737–838 jet to be delivered would carry a 'retro-livery' based on the airline's 1970s' colour scheme design featuring the iconic 'Flying Kangaroo' on its tail and other aspects drawn from its 1970s fleet. The aircraft was delivered on 17 November. On 16 November 2015 the airline unveiled a second Boeing 737–838 in a different 'retro-livery' from 1959 to celebrate the airline's 95th birthday.\n\nSeveral Qantas aircraft have been decorated with promotional liveries, promoting telecommunications company Optus; the Disney motion picture \"Planes\"; the Australian national association football team, the Socceroos; and the Australian national rugby union team, the Wallabies. Two aircraft – an Airbus A330-200 and a Boeing 747–400 – were decorated with special liveries promoting the Oneworld airline alliance (of which Qantas is a member) in 2009. On 29 September 2014, nonstop Airbus A380 service to Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport was inaugurated using an A380 decorated with a commemorative cowboy hat and bandana on the kangaroo tail logo. Prior to the Sydney Mardi Gras, Qantas decorated one of its Airbus A330-300 aircraft with rainbow lettering and depicted a rainbow flag on the tail of the aircraft.\n\nQantas has several in-flight entertainment systems installed on its aircraft. Across the fleet, the in-flight experience is referred to as \"On:Q\". Every Qantas mainline aircraft has some form of video audio entertainment. \"iQ\" is featured in all classes of the Airbus A380, refurbished 747s, A330-300s and refurbished Airbus A330-200s. Additionally, it has been implemented on new Boeing 737-800s, and refurbished Boeing 747s. This audio video on demand (AVOD) experience is based on the Panasonic Avionics system and features expanded entertainment options; touch screens; and new communications-related features such as Wi-Fi and mobile phone functionality; as well as increased support for electronics (such as USB and iPod connectivity).\n\nThe \"Total Entertainment System\" by Rockwell Collins is featured on the two unrefurbished Boeing 747s and two unrefurbished.Airbus A330-200 aircraft. This AVOD system includes personal LCD screens in all classes, located in the seat back for economy and business class, and in the armrest for premium economy and first class.\n\nThe Mainscreen System, where video screens are the only available form of video entertainment; movies are shown on the screens for lengthier flights, or TV programmes on shorter flights. A news telecast will usually feature at the start of the flight. Audio options are less varied than on iQ or the Total Entertainment System. The Mainscreen System is installed on all domestic configured Boeing 737-800s delivered before 2011.\n\nSince 2014, Sky News Australia has provided multiple news bulletins both in-flight and in Qantas branded lounges. Previously, the Australian Nine Network provided a news bulletin for Qantas entitled \"Nine's Qantas Inflight News\", which was the same broadcast as Nine's \"Early Morning News\", however Nine lost the contract to Sky News.\n\nQ Streaming is an in-flight entertainment system in which entertainment is streamed to iPads, available in all classes. A selection of movies, TV, music and a kids' choice are available.\n\n\"Qantas The Australian Way\" is the airline's in-flight magazine. In mid-2015 the magazine ended a 14-year publishing deal with Bauer Media, switching its publisher to Medium Rare.\n\nBoeing's cancellation of the Connexion by Boeing system caused concerns that in-flight internet would not be available on next-generation aircraft such as Qantas' fleet of Airbus A380s. However, Qantas announced in July 2007 that all service classes in its fleet of A380s would have wireless internet access, as well as seat-back access to e-mail and cached web browsing. Certain elements would also be retrofitted into existing Boeing 747-400s. The in-flight entertainment system indicates that Internet access is provided by OnAir.\n\nIn April 2007, Qantas announced a trial for use of mobile telephones with AeroMobile, during domestic services for three months on a Boeing 767. During the trial, passengers were allowed to send and receive text messages and emails, but were not able to make or receive calls.\n\nQantas moved from an in-house Passenger Service System known as QUBE (Qantas Universal Business Environment) to an outsourced solution provided by Amadeus in late 2000. In September 2007 Qantas announced a ten-year extension of the outsourcing agreement. In addition to using Amadeus' Altéa platform for reservation and inventory management Qantas extended usage of the system by adopting the departure control module in February 2008.\n\nIn July 2015, Qantas signed a deal with American cable network HBO to provide over 120 hours of television programming in-flight from the network which will be updated monthly, as well as original lifestyle and entertainment programming from both Foxtel and National Geographic Channel.\n\nFirst class is offered exclusively on Airbus A380s and some Boeing 747-400s.\n\nIt offers 14 individual suites in a 1-1-1 layout. The seats rotate, facing forward for takeoff, but rotating to the side for dining and sleeping, with 83.5 in seat pitch (extending to a 212 cm fully flat bed) and a width of . Each suite has a widescreen HD monitor with 1,000 AVOD programs. In addition to 110 V AC power outlets, USB ports are offered for connectivity. Passengers are also able to make use of the on-board business lounge on the upper deck. Complimentary access to either the first class or business class lounges (or affiliated lounges) is offered.\n\nOn the Boeing 747–400, there are 14 flat-bed seats, located on the main deck. The seats are slightly shorter than on the A380, due to their position near the nose of the aircraft: versus .\n\nBusiness class is offered on all Qantas mainline passenger aircraft.\n\nInternational Business Class is available on the Boeing 747, International Airbus A330-200s, the A330-300 and the Airbus A380. On the Boeing 747, seating is in a 2-3-2 configuration on the main deck and a 2–2 configuration on the upper deck. The A330 features a 2-2-2 configuration. Two versions of what Qantas calls its \"Skybed\", the lie-flat business-class seat, are available. Older versions of the lie-flat Skybeds feature of seat pitch and width, however passengers sleep at a distinct slope to the cabin floor. Later versions of the Skybed have an pitch, and lie fully horizontal. By the end of 2016, the business class of its entire fleet of Airbus A330 aircraft will be fitted with lie flat seats designed by Mark Newson.\n\nThe Boeing 747s and Airbus A330s feature a touchscreen monitor with 400 AVOD programs. Qantas' new international business class product is featured on the Airbus A380. It features 64 fully flat Skybed seats with seat pitch (converting to a 200 cm long bed). These seats are located on the upper-deck in a 2-2-2 configuration in two separate cabins. Features include a 30 cm touchscreen monitor with 1,000 AVOD programmes and an on-board lounge. The latest business class product introduced on the A330 in October 2014 features a fully flat 198 cm bed in a 1-2-1 configuration making each passenger having direct aisle access. This seat can be reclined during take off and landing while sporting the latest Panasonic eX3 system with a touchscreen. \nThe A330 would fly to its Asian and transcontinental routes across Australia while serving smaller routes such as the East Coast triangle. The 747 would fly to its Asian and African routes and serves North and South America. The A380 would be seen on its flagship routes such as London via Dubai, Los Angeles, Dallas and a seasonal route to Hong Kong\n\nComplimentary access to the Qantas business class lounge (or affiliated lounges) is also offered.\n\nPremium economy class is only available on Airbus A380, Boeing 787-9 and all Boeing 747–400 aircraft. It has a seat pitch of on the Boeing 747 and it ranges from on the Airbus A380, with a width of . On the Boeing 747, it is configured in a 2-4-2 seating arrangement around the middle of the main deck, whilst it is in a 2-3-2 at the rear of the upper deck on the A380. All A380s have 35 seats.\n\nQantas premium economy is presented as a lighter business class product rather than most other airlines' premium economy, which is often presented as a higher economy class, however Qantas premium economy does not offer access to premium lounges, and meals are only a slightly uprated version of economy class meals.\n\nEconomy class is available on all Qantas mainline passenger aircraft.\n\nSeat pitch is usually and seat width ranges from . Layouts are 3–3 on the 737, 2-4-2 on the A330 and 3-4-3 on the 747. On the A380, the layout is 3-4-3 and there are four self-service snack bars located in between cabins.\n\nQantas has smartphone application programs (\"apps\") for Android, iOS and Windows Phone platforms. The iOS apps are separated into two – one (named Qantas Points) for members of its Qantas Frequent Flyer programme to manage their points, while the other (named Qantas) provides mobile check-in and boarding passes to link with Passbook, live flight updates and information on airport lounges, fare sales/alerts, and the ability to book flights and hotels. An Android app was launched on 7 August 2013.\n\nThe Qantas frequent flyer programme is aimed at rewarding customer loyalty. Points are accrued based on distance flown, with bonuses that vary by travel class. Points can also be earned on other Oneworld airlines as well as through other non-airline partners. Points can be redeemed for flights or upgrades on flights operated by Qantas, Oneworld airlines, and other partners. Other partners include credit cards, car rental companies, hotels and many others. To join the programme, passengers living in Australia or New Zealand pay a one-off joining fee, and then become a Bronze Frequent Flyer (residents of other countries may join without a fee). All accounts remain active as long as there is points activity once every eighteen months. Flights with Qantas and selected partner airlines earn Status Credits — and accumulation of these allows progression to Silver status (Oneworld Ruby), Gold status (Oneworld Sapphire), Platinum and Platinum One status (Oneworld Emerald).\n\nQantas has faced criticism regarding availability of seats for members redeeming points. In 2004, the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission directed Qantas to provide greater disclosure to members regarding the availability of frequent-flyer seats.\n\nIn March 2008, an analyst at JPMorgan Chase suggested that the Qantas frequent-flyer program could be worth A$2 billion (US$1.9 billion), representing more than a quarter of the total market value of Qantas.\n\nOn 1 July 2008 a major overhaul of the programme was announced. The two key new features of the programme were Any Seat rewards, in which members could now redeem any seat on an aircraft, rather than just selected seats — at a price. The second new feature was Points Plus Pay, which has enabled members to use a combination of cash and points to redeem an award. Additionally, the Frequent Flyer store was also expanded to include a greater range of products and services.\nAnnouncing the revamp, Qantas confirmed it would be seeking to raise about A$1 billion in 2008 by selling up to 40% of the frequent flyer program. However, in September 2008, it stated it would defer the float, citing volatile market conditions.\n\nThe Qantas Club is the airline lounge for Qantas with airport locations around Australia and the world. Additionally, Qantas operates dedicated international first-class lounges in Sydney, Melbourne, Brisbane, Auckland and Los Angeles.\n\nIn April 2013, Qantas opened its new flagship lounge in Singapore, the Qantas Singapore Lounge. This replaced the existing separate first- and business-class lounges as a result of the new Emirates alliance. A similar combined lounge was also opened in Hong Kong with future plans to consolidate and modernise the Brisbane international lounges. These new lounges provide the same service currently offered by Sofitel in its flagship First lounges in Sydney and Melbourne and a dining experience featuring Neil Perry's Spice Temple inspired dishes and signature cocktails.\n\nQantas Club Members, Gold Frequent Flyers and Oneworld Sapphire holders are permitted to enter domestic Qantas Clubs when flying on Qantas or Jetstar flights along with one guest who need not be travelling. Platinum and Oneworld Emerald Members are permitted to bring in two guests who do not need to be travelling. Internationally, members use Qantas International Business Class lounges (or the Oneworld equivalent). Guests of the member must be travelling to gain access to international lounges. When flying with American Airlines, members have access to Admirals Club lounges and when flying on British Airways, members have access to British Airways' Terraces and Galleries Lounges.\n\nPlatinum Frequent Flyers had previously been able to access the Qantas Club in Australian domestic terminals at any time, regardless of whether they were flying that day. Travellers holding Oneworld Sapphire or Emerald status are also allowed in Qantas Club lounges worldwide.\n\nAccess to Qantas First lounges is open to passengers travelling on internationally-operated Qantas or Oneworld first-class flights, as well as Qantas platinum and Oneworld emerald frequent flyers. Emirates first-class passengers are also eligible for access to the Qantas first lounges in Sydney and Melbourne.\n\nThe Qantas Club also offers membership by paid subscription (one, two, or four years) or by achievement of Gold or Platinum frequent flyer status. Benefits of membership include lounge access, priority check-in, priority luggage handling and increased luggage allowances.\n\nIt is often claimed, most notably in the 1988 movie \"Rain Man\", that Qantas has never had an aircraft crash. While it is true that the company has neither lost a jet airliner nor had any jet fatalities, it had eight fatal accidents and an aircraft shot down between 1927 and 1945, with the loss of 63 people. Half of these accidents and the shoot-down occurred during World War II, when the Qantas aircraft were operating on behalf of Allied military forces. Post-war, it lost another two aircraft with the loss of 17 lives. To this date, the last fatal accident suffered by Qantas was in 1951. For this reason, Qantas has been consistently ranked as one of the world's safest airlines.\n\nSince the end of World War II, the following accidents and incidents have occurred:\n\nOn 26 May 1971 Qantas received a call from a \"Mr. Brown\" claiming that there was a bomb planted on a Hong Kong-bound jet and demanding $500,000 in unmarked $20 notes. He was treated seriously when he directed police to an airport locker where a functional bomb was found. Arrangements were made to pick up the money in front of the head office of the airline in the heart of the Sydney business district. Qantas paid the money and it was collected, after which Mr. Brown called again, advising the \"bomb on the plane\" story was a hoax. The initial pursuit of the perpetrator was bungled by the New South Wales Police Force who, despite having been advised of the matter from the time of the first call, failed to establish adequate surveillance of the pick-up of the money. Directed not to use their radios (for fear of being \"overheard\"), the police were unable to communicate adequately. Tipped off by a still-unidentified informer, the police arrested an Englishman, Peter Macari, finding more than $138,000 hidden in an Annandale property. Convicted and sentenced to 15 years in prison, Macari served nine years before being deported to Britain. Over $224,000 has still not been found. The 1990 telemovie \"Call Me Mr. Brown\", directed by Scott Hicks and produced by Terry Jennings, relates to this incident. On 4 July 1997 a copycat extortion attempt was thwarted by police and Qantas security staff.\n\nIn November 2005 it was revealed that Qantas had a policy of not seating adult male passengers next to unaccompanied children. This led to accusations of discrimination. The policy came to light following an incident in 2004 when Mark Wolsay, who was seated next to a young boy on a Qantas flight in New Zealand, was asked to change seats with a female passenger. A steward informed him that \"it was the airline's policy that only women were allowed to sit next to unaccompanied children\". Cameron Murphy of the NSW Council for Civil Liberties president criticised the policy and stated that \"there was no basis for the ban\". He said it was wrong to assume that all adult males posed a danger to children. The policy has also been criticised for failing to take female abusers into consideration.\n\nIn 2010, when British Airways was successfully sued to change its child seating policy, Qantas argued again that banning men from sitting next to unaccompanied children \"reflected parents' concerns\". In August 2012, the controversy resurfaced when a male passenger had to swap seats with a female passenger after the crew noticed he was sitting next to an unrelated girl travelling alone. The person concerned felt discriminated and humiliated before the flight guests as a possible paedophile. A Qantas spokesman defended the policy as consistent with that of other airlines in Australia and around the globe.\n\nIn 2006 a class action lawsuit, alleging price-fixing on air cargo freight, was commenced in Australia. The lawsuit was settled early in 2011 with Qantas agreeing to pay in excess of $21 million to settle the case.\n\nQantas has pleaded guilty to participating in a cartel that fixed the price of air cargo. Qantas Airways Ltd. was fined CAD$155,000 after it admitted that its freight division fixed surcharges on cargo exported on certain routes from Canada between May 2002 and February 2006.\nIn July 2007, Qantas pleaded guilty in the United States to price fixing and was fined a total of $61 million through the Department of Justice investigation. The executive in charge was jailed for six months. Other Qantas executives were granted immunity after the airline agreed to co-operate with authorities.\nIn 2008 the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission fined the airline $20 million for breaches of the acts associated with protecting consumers. In November 2010 Qantas was fined 8.8 million euros for its part in an air cargo cartel involving up to 11 other airlines. Qantas was fined NZ$6.5 million in April 2011 when it pleaded guilty in the New Zealand High Court to the cartel operation.\n\nIn response to ongoing industrial unrest over failed negotiations involving three unions (the Australian Licensed Aircraft Engineers Association (ALAEA), the Australian and International Pilots Association (AIPA) and the Transport Workers Union of Australia (TWU), the company grounded its entire domestic and international fleet from 5 pm AEDT on 29 October. Employees involved would be locked out from 8 p.m. AEDT on 31 October. It was reported that the grounding would have a daily financial impact of A$20 million. In the early hours of 31 October, Fair Work Australia ordered that all industrial action taken by Qantas and the involved trade unions be terminated immediately. The order was requested by the federal government amid fears that an extended period of grounding would do significant damage to the national economy, especially the tourism and mining sectors. The grounding affected an estimated 68,000 customers worldwide.\n\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "25256", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25256", "title": "QED (text editor)", "text": "QED (text editor)\n\nQED is a line-oriented computer text editor that was developed by Butler Lampson and L. Peter Deutsch for the Berkeley Timesharing System running on the SDS 940. It was implemented by L. Peter Deutsch and Dana Angluin between 1965 and 1966.\n\nQED (for \"quick editor\") addressed teleprinter usage, but systems \"for CRT displays [were] not considered, since many of their design considerations [were] quite different.\"\nKen Thompson later wrote a version for CTSS; this version was notable for introducing regular expressions. Thompson rewrote QED in BCPL for Multics. The Multics version was ported to the GE-600 system used at Bell Labs in the late 1960s under GECOS and later GCOS after Honeywell took over GE's computer business. The GECOS-GCOS port used I/O routines written by A. W. Winklehoff. Dennis Ritchie, Ken Thompson and Brian Kernighan wrote the QED manuals used at Bell Labs.\nGiven that the authors were the primary developers of the Unix operating system, it is natural that QED had a strong influence on the classic UNIX text editors ed, sed and their descendants such as ex and sam, and more distantly AWK and Perl.\n\nA version of QED named FRED (Friendly Editor) was written at the\nUniversity of Waterloo for Honeywell systems by Peter Fraser. A University of Toronto team consisting of Tom Duff, Rob Pike, Hugh Redelmeier, and David Tilbrook implemented a version of QED that runs on UNIX; David Tilbrook later included QED as part of his QEF tool set.\n\nQED was also used as a character-oriented editor on the Norwegian-made Norsk Data systems, first Nord TSS, then Sintran III. It was implemented for the Nord-1 computer in 1971 by Bo Lewendal who after working with Deutsch and Lampson at Project Genie and at the Berkeley Computer Corporation, had taken a job with Norsk Data (and who developed the Nord TSS later in 1971). \n\n\n"}
{"id": "25257", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25257", "title": "Qusay Hussein", "text": "Qusay Hussein\n\nQusay Saddam Hussein al-Tikriti (or Qusai, ; – ) was the second son of Iraqi President Saddam Hussein. He was appointed as his father's heir apparent in 2000.\n\nQusay's older brother Uday was viewed as Saddam's heir-apparent until he sustained serious injuries in a 1996 assassination attempt. Unlike Uday, who was known for extravagance and erratic, violent behavior, Qusay Hussein kept a low profile. He was married to Sahar Maher Abd al-Rashid; the daughter of Maher Abd al-Rashid, a top ranking military official, and had three sons; one of the sons, Mustapha Qusay (born 3 January 1989 in Tikrit), was killed alongside his father in an attack by U.S. troops on their house. The other two – Yahya Qusay (born 1991) and Yaqub Qusay – are presumed alive, but their whereabouts are unknown.\n\nUnlike other members of his family and the government, little information is known about Qusay, politically or personally. It is believed that until the 2003 Invasion of Iraq Qusay was the supervisor of the Iraqi Republican Guard and the head of internal security forces (possibly the Special Security Organization (SSO)), and had authority over other Iraqi military units.\n\nQusay played a role in crushing the Shiite uprising in the aftermath of the 1991 Gulf War and is also thought to have masterminded the destruction of the southern marshes of Iraq. The wholesale destruction of these marshes ended a centuries-old way of life that prevailed among the Shiite Marsh Arabs who made the wetlands their home, and ruined the habitat for dozens of species of migratory birds. The Iraqi government stated that the action was intended to produce usable farmland, though a number of outsiders believe the destruction was aimed against the Marsh Arabs as retribution for their participation in the 1991 uprising.\n\nIraqi dissidents claim that Qusay was responsible for the killing of many political activists. \"The Sunday Times\" reported that Qusay ordered the killing of Khalis Mohsen al-Tikriti, an engineer at the military industrialization organization, because he believed Mohsen was planning to leave Iraq. In 1998, Iraqi opposition groups accused Qusay of ordering the execution of thousands of political prisoners after hundreds of inmates were similarly executed to make room for new prisoners in crowded jails.\n\nOn the afternoon of 22 July 2003, troops of the 101st Airborne 3/327th Infantry HQ and C-Company, aided by U.S. Special Forces killed Qusay, his 14-year-old son Mustapha, and his older brother Uday, during a raid on a home in the northern Iraqi city of Mosul. Acting on a tip from a cousin, a special forces team attempted to apprehend the inhabitants of the house. After being fired on, the special forces moved back and called for backup. As few as 40 101st Soldiers and 8 Task Force 121 operators were on the scene. After Task Force 121 members were wounded, the 3/327th Infantry surrounded and fired on the house with a TOW missile, Mark 19 Automatic Grenade Launcher, M2 50 Caliber Machine guns and small arms. After about four hours of battle (the whole operation lasted 6 hours), the soldiers entered the house and found four dead, including the two brothers and their bodyguard. There were reports that Qusay's 14-year-old son Mustapha was the fourth body found. Brig. Gen. Frank Helmick, the assistant commander of 101st Airborne, commented that all occupants of the house died during the fierce gun battle before U.S. troops entered.\n\nOn 23 July 2003, the American command said that it had conclusively identified two of the dead men as Saddam Hussein's sons from dental records. Because many Iraqis were skeptical of news of the deaths, the U.S. Government released photos of the corpses and allowed Iraq's governing council to identify the bodies despite the U.S. objection to the publication of American corpses on Arab television. They also announced that the informant, possibly the owner of the house, would receive the combined $30 million reward on the pair. Qusay was the ace of clubs in the coalition forces' most-wanted Iraqi playing cards. His father was the ace of spades and his brother was the ace of hearts.\n\n"}
{"id": "25263", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25263", "title": "Quatrain", "text": "Quatrain\n\nA quatrain is a type of stanza, or a complete poem, consisting of four lines.\n\nExisting in a variety of forms, the quatrain appears in poems from the poetic traditions of various ancient civilizations including Ancient India, Ancient Greece, Ancient Rome, and China, and continues into the 21st century, where it is seen in works published in many languages. During Europe's Dark Ages, in the Middle East and especially Iran, polymath poets such as Omar Khayyam continued to popularize this form of poetry, also known as Ruba'i, well beyond their borders and time. Michel de Nostredame (Nostradamus) used the quatrain form to deliver his famous prophecies in the 16th century.\n\nThere are fifteen possible rhyme schemes, but the most traditional and common are: AAAA, ABAB, and ABBA.\n\n\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "25264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25264", "title": "Quantum chromodynamics", "text": "Quantum chromodynamics\n\nIn theoretical physics, quantum chromodynamics (QCD) is the theory of the strong interaction between quarks and gluons, the fundamental particles that make up composite hadrons such as the proton, neutron and pion. QCD is a type of quantum field theory called a non-abelian gauge theory, with symmetry group SU(3). The QCD analog of electric charge is a property called \"color\". Gluons are the force carrier of the theory, like photons are for the electromagnetic force in quantum electrodynamics. The theory is an important part of the Standard Model of particle physics. A large body of experimental evidence for QCD has been gathered over the years.\n\nQCD exhibits two main properties:\n\n\nAmerican physicist Murray Gell-Mann (b. 1929) coined the word \"quark\" in its present sense. It originally comes from the phrase \"Three quarks for Muster Mark\" in \"Finnegans Wake\" by James Joyce. On June 27, 1978, Gell-Mann wrote a private letter to the editor of the \"Oxford English Dictionary\", in which he related that he had been influenced by Joyce's words: \"The allusion to three quarks seemed perfect.\" (Originally, only three quarks had been discovered.) Gell-Mann, however, wanted to pronounce the word to rhyme with \"fork\" rather than with \"park\", as Joyce seemed to indicate by rhyming words in the vicinity such as \"Mark\". Gell-Mann got around that \"by supposing that one ingredient of the line 'Three quarks for Muster Mark' was a cry of 'Three quarts for Mister ...' heard in H.C. Earwicker's pub\", a plausible suggestion given the complex punning in Joyce's novel.\n\nThe three kinds of charge in QCD (as opposed to one in quantum electrodynamics or QED) are usually referred to as \"color charge\" by loose analogy to the three kinds of color (red, green and blue) perceived by humans. Other than this nomenclature, the quantum parameter \"color\" is completely unrelated to the everyday, familiar phenomenon of color.\n\nThe force between quarks is known as the colour force (or color force ) or strong interaction, and is responsible for the strong nuclear force.\n\nSince the theory of electric charge is dubbed \"electrodynamics\", the Greek word χρῶμα \"chroma\" \"color\" is applied to the theory of color charge, \"chromodynamics\".\n\nWith the invention of bubble chambers and spark chambers in the 1950s, experimental particle physics discovered a large and ever-growing number of particles called hadrons. It seemed that such a large number of particles could not all be fundamental. First, the particles were classified by charge and isospin by Eugene Wigner and Werner Heisenberg; then, in 1953–56, according to strangeness by Murray Gell-Mann and Kazuhiko Nishijima (see Gell-Mann–Nishijima formula). To gain greater insight, the hadrons were sorted into groups having similar properties and masses using the \"eightfold way\", invented in 1961 by Gell-Mann and Yuval Ne'eman. Gell-Mann and George Zweig, correcting an earlier approach of Shoichi Sakata, went on to propose in 1963 that the structure of the groups could be explained by the existence of three flavors of smaller particles inside the hadrons: the quarks.\n\nPerhaps the first remark that quarks should possess an additional quantum number was made as a short footnote in the preprint of Boris Struminsky in connection with Ω hyperon composed of three strange quarks with parallel spins (this situation was peculiar, because since quarks are fermions, such combination is forbidden by the Pauli exclusion principle): Boris Struminsky was a PhD student of Nikolay Bogolyubov. The problem considered in this preprint was suggested by Nikolay Bogolyubov, who advised Boris Struminsky in this research. In the beginning of 1965, Nikolay Bogolyubov, Boris Struminsky and Albert Tavkhelidze wrote a preprint with a more detailed discussion of the additional quark quantum degree of freedom. This work was also presented by Albert Tavchelidze without obtaining consent of his collaborators for doing so at an international conference in Trieste (Italy), in May 1965.\n\nA similar mysterious situation was with the Δ baryon; in the quark model, it is composed of three up quarks with parallel spins. In 1964–65, and Greenberg and Han–Nambu independently resolved the problem by proposing that quarks possess an additional SU(3) gauge degree of freedom, later called color charge. Han and Nambu noted that quarks might interact via an octet of vector gauge bosons: the gluons.\n\nSince free quark searches consistently failed to turn up any evidence for the new particles, and because an elementary particle back then was \"defined\" as a particle which could be separated and isolated, Gell-Mann often said that quarks were merely convenient mathematical constructs, not real particles. The meaning of this statement was usually clear in context: He meant quarks are confined, but he also was implying that the strong interactions could probably not be fully described by quantum field theory.\n\nRichard Feynman argued that high energy experiments showed quarks are real particles: he called them \"partons\" (since they were parts of hadrons). By particles, Feynman meant objects which travel along paths, elementary particles in a field theory.\n\nThe difference between Feynman's and Gell-Mann's approaches reflected a deep split in the theoretical physics community. Feynman thought the quarks have a distribution of position or momentum, like any other particle, and he (correctly) believed that the diffusion of parton momentum explained diffractive scattering. Although Gell-Mann believed that certain quark charges could be localized, he was open to the possibility that the quarks themselves could not be localized because space and time break down. This was the more radical approach of S-matrix theory.\n\nJames Bjorken proposed that pointlike partons would imply certain relations should hold in deep inelastic scattering of electrons and protons, which were spectacularly verified in experiments at SLAC in 1969. This led physicists to abandon the S-matrix approach for the strong interactions.\n\nIn 1973 the concept of color as the source of a \"strong field\" was developed into the theory of QCD by European physicists Harald Fritzsch and Heinrich Leutwyler, together with American physicist Murray Gell-Mann. In particular, they employed the general field theory developed in 1954 by Chen Ning Yang and Robert Mills (see Yang–Mills theory), in which the carrier particles of a force can themselves radiate further carrier particles. (This is different from QED, where the photons that carry the electromagnetic force do not radiate further photons.)\n\nThe discovery of asymptotic freedom in the strong interactions by David Gross, David Politzer and Frank Wilczek allowed physicists to make precise predictions of the results of many high energy experiments using the quantum field theory technique of perturbation theory. Evidence of gluons was discovered in three-jet events at PETRA in 1979. These experiments became more and more precise, culminating in the verification of perturbative QCD at the level of a few percent at the LEP in CERN.\n\nThe other side of asymptotic freedom is confinement. Since the force between color charges does not decrease with distance, it is believed that quarks and gluons can never be liberated from hadrons. This aspect of the theory is verified within lattice QCD computations, but is not mathematically proven. One of the Millennium Prize Problems announced by the Clay Mathematics Institute requires a claimant to produce such a proof. Other aspects of non-perturbative QCD are the exploration of phases of quark matter, including the quark–gluon plasma.\n\nThe relation between the short-distance particle limit and the confining long-distance limit is one of the topics recently explored using string theory, the modern form of S-matrix theory.\n\nEvery field theory of particle physics is based on certain symmetries of nature whose existence is deduced from observations. These can be\n\nQCD is a gauge theory of the SU(3) gauge group obtained by taking the color charge to define a local symmetry.\n\nSince the strong interaction does not discriminate between different flavors of quark, QCD has approximate flavor symmetry, which is broken by the differing masses of the quarks.\n\nThere are additional global symmetries whose definitions require the notion of chirality, discrimination between left and right-handed. If the spin of a particle has a positive projection on its direction of motion then it is called left-handed; otherwise, it is right-handed. Chirality and handedness are not the same, but become approximately equivalent at high energies.\n\nAs mentioned, \"asymptotic freedom\" means that at large energy – this corresponds also to \"short distances\" – there is practically no interaction between the particles. This is in contrast – more precisely one would say \"dual\" – to what one is used to, since usually one connects the absence of interactions with \"large\" distances. However, as already mentioned in the original paper of Franz Wegner, a solid state theorist who introduced 1971 simple gauge invariant lattice models, the high-temperature behaviour of the \"original model\", e.g. the strong decay of correlations at large distances, corresponds to the low-temperature behaviour of the (usually ordered!) \"dual model\", namely the asymptotic decay of non-trivial correlations, e.g. short-range deviations from almost perfect arrangements, for short distances. Here, in contrast to Wegner, we have only the dual model, which is that one described in this article.\n\nThe color group SU(3) corresponds to the local symmetry whose gauging gives rise to QCD. The electric charge labels a representation of the local symmetry group U(1) which is gauged to give QED: this is an abelian group. If one considers a version of QCD with \"N\" flavors of massless quarks, then there is a global (chiral) flavor symmetry group SU(\"N\") × SU(\"N\") × U(1) × U(1). The chiral symmetry is spontaneously broken by the QCD vacuum to the vector (L+R) SU(\"N\") with the formation of a chiral condensate. The vector symmetry, U(1) corresponds to the baryon number of quarks and is an exact symmetry. The axial symmetry U(1) is exact in the classical theory, but broken in the quantum theory, an occurrence called an anomaly. Gluon field configurations called instantons are closely related to this anomaly.\n\nThere are two different types of SU(3) symmetry: there is the symmetry that acts on the different colors of quarks, and this is an exact gauge symmetry mediated by the gluons, and there is also a flavor symmetry which rotates different flavors of quarks to each other, or \"flavor SU(3)\". Flavor SU(3) is an approximate symmetry of the vacuum of QCD, and is not a fundamental symmetry at all. It is an accidental consequence of the small mass of the three lightest quarks.\n\nIn the QCD vacuum there are vacuum condensates of all the quarks whose mass is less than the QCD scale. This includes the up and down quarks, and to a lesser extent the strange quark, but not any of the others. The vacuum is symmetric under SU(2) isospin rotations of up and down, and to a lesser extent under rotations of up, down and strange, or full flavor group SU(3), and the observed particles make isospin and SU(3) multiplets.\n\nThe approximate flavor symmetries do have associated gauge bosons, observed particles like the rho and the omega, but these particles are nothing like the gluons and they are not massless. They are emergent gauge bosons in an approximate string description of QCD.\n\nThe dynamics of the quarks and gluons are controlled by the quantum chromodynamics Lagrangian. The gauge invariant QCD Lagrangian is\n\nwhere formula_1 is the quark field, a dynamical function of spacetime, in the fundamental representation of the SU(3) gauge group, indexed by formula_2; formula_3 are the gluon fields, also dynamical functions of spacetime, in the adjoint representation of the SU(3) gauge group, indexed by \"a\", \"b\"... The γ are Dirac matrices connecting the spinor representation to the vector representation of the Lorentz group.\n\nThe symbol formula_4 represents the gauge invariant gluon field strength tensor, analogous to the electromagnetic field strength tensor, \"F\", in quantum electrodynamics. It is given by:\n\nwhere \"f\" are the structure constants of SU(3). Note that the rules to move-up or pull-down the \"a\", \"b\", or \"c\" indices are \"trivial\", (+, ..., +), so that \"f\" = \"f\" = \"f\" whereas for the \"μ\" or \"ν\" indices one has the non-trivial \"relativistic\" rules corresponding to the metric signature (+ − − −).\n\nThe variables \"m\" and \"g\" correspond to the quark mass and coupling of the theory, respectively, which are subject to renormalization.\n\nAn important theoretical concept is the \"Wilson loop\" (named after Kenneth G. Wilson). In lattice QCD, the final term of the above Lagrangian is discretized via Wilson loops, and more generally the behavior of Wilson loops can distinguish confined and deconfined phases.\n\nQuarks are massive spin- fermions which carry a color charge whose gauging is the content of QCD. Quarks are represented by Dirac fields in the fundamental representation 3 of the gauge group SU(3). They also carry electric charge (either − or +) and participate in weak interactions as part of weak isospin doublets. They carry global quantum numbers including the baryon number, which is for each quark, hypercharge and one of the flavor quantum numbers.\n\nGluons are spin-1 bosons which also carry color charges, since they lie in the adjoint representation 8 of SU(3). They have no electric charge, do not participate in the weak interactions, and have no flavor. They lie in the singlet representation 1 of all these symmetry groups.\n\nEvery quark has its own antiquark. The charge of each antiquark is exactly the opposite of the corresponding quark.\n\nAccording to the rules of quantum field theory, and the associated Feynman diagrams, the above theory gives rise to three basic interactions: a quark may emit (or absorb) a gluon, a gluon may emit (or absorb) a gluon, and two gluons may directly interact. This contrasts with QED, in which only the first kind of interaction occurs, since photons have no charge. Diagrams involving Faddeev–Popov ghosts must be considered too (except in the unitarity gauge).\n\nDetailed computations with the above-mentioned Lagrangian show that the effective potential between a quark and its anti-quark in a meson contains a term that increases in proportion to the distance between the quark and anti-quark (formula_6), which represents some kind of \"stiffness\" of the interaction between the particle and its anti-particle at large distances, similar to the entropic elasticity of a rubber band (see below). This leads to \"confinement\"  of the quarks to the interior of hadrons, i.e. mesons and nucleons, with typical radii \"R\", corresponding to former \"Bag models\" of the hadrons The order of magnitude of the \"bag radius\" is 1 fm (= 10 m). Moreover, the above-mentioned stiffness is quantitatively related to the so-called \"area law\" behaviour of the expectation value of the Wilson loop product \"P\" of the ordered coupling constants around a closed loop \"W\"; i.e. formula_7 is proportional to the \"area\" enclosed by the loop. For this behaviour the non-abelian behaviour of the gauge group is essential.\n\nFurther analysis of the content of the theory is complicated. Various techniques have been developed to work with QCD. Some of them are discussed briefly below.\n\nThis approach is based on asymptotic freedom, which allows perturbation theory to be used accurately in experiments performed at very high energies. Although limited in scope, this approach has resulted in the most precise tests of QCD to date.\n\nAmong non-perturbative approaches to QCD, the most well established one is lattice QCD. This approach uses a discrete set of spacetime points (called the lattice) to reduce the analytically intractable path integrals of the continuum theory to a very difficult numerical computation which is then carried out on supercomputers like the QCDOC which was constructed for precisely this purpose. While it is a slow and resource-intensive approach, it has wide applicability, giving insight into parts of the theory inaccessible by other means, in particular into the explicit forces acting between quarks and antiquarks in a meson. However, the numerical sign problem makes it difficult to use lattice methods to study QCD at high density and low temperature (e.g. nuclear matter or the interior of neutron stars).\n\nA well-known approximation scheme, the expansion, starts from the premise that the number of colors is infinite, and makes a series of corrections to account for the fact that it is not. Until now, it has been the source of qualitative insight rather than a method for quantitative predictions. Modern variants include the AdS/CFT approach.\n\nFor specific problems effective theories may be written down which give qualitatively correct results in certain limits. In the best of cases, these may then be obtained as systematic expansions in some parameter of the QCD Lagrangian. One such effective field theory is chiral perturbation theory or ChiPT, which is the QCD effective theory at low energies. More precisely, it is a low energy expansion based on the spontaneous chiral symmetry breaking of QCD, which is an exact symmetry when quark masses are equal to zero, but for the u, d and s quark, which have small mass, it is still a good approximate symmetry. Depending on the number of quarks which are treated as light, one uses either SU(2) ChiPT or SU(3) ChiPT . Other effective theories are heavy quark effective theory (which expands around heavy quark mass near infinity), and soft-collinear effective theory (which expands around large ratios of energy scales). In addition to effective theories, models like the Nambu–Jona-Lasinio model and the chiral model are often used when discussing general features.\n\nBased on an Operator product expansion one can derive sets of relations that connect different observables with each other.\n\nIn one of his recent works, Kei-Ichi Kondo derived as a low-energy limit of QCD, a theory linked to the Nambu–Jona-Lasinio model since it is basically a particular non-local version of the Polyakov–Nambu–Jona-Lasinio model. The later being in its local version, nothing but the Nambu–Jona-Lasinio model in which one has included the Polyakov loop effect, in order to describe a 'certain confinement'.\n\nThe Nambu–Jona-Lasinio model in itself is, among many other things, used because it is a 'relatively simple' model of chiral symmetry breaking, phenomenon present up to certain conditions (Chiral limit i.e. massless fermions) in QCD itself.\nIn this model, however, there is no confinement. In particular, the energy of an isolated quark in the physical vacuum turns out well defined and finite.\n\nThe notion of quark flavors was prompted by the necessity of explaining the properties of hadrons during the development of the quark model. The notion of color was necessitated by the puzzle of the . This has been dealt with in the section on the history of QCD.\n\nThe first evidence for quarks as real constituent elements of hadrons was obtained in deep inelastic scattering experiments at SLAC. The first evidence for gluons came in three jet events at PETRA.\n\nSeveral good quantitative tests of perturbative QCD exist:\n\nQuantitative tests of non-perturbative QCD are fewer, because the predictions are harder to make. The best is probably the running of the QCD coupling as probed through lattice computations of heavy-quarkonium spectra. There is a recent claim about the mass of the heavy meson B . Other non-perturbative tests are currently at the level of 5% at best. Continuing work on masses and form factors of hadrons and their weak matrix elements are promising candidates for future quantitative tests. The whole subject of quark matter and the quark–gluon plasma is a non-perturbative test bed for QCD which still remains to be properly exploited.\n\nOne qualitative prediction of QCD is that there exist composite particles made solely of gluons called glueballs that have not yet been definitively observed experimentally. A definitive observation of a glueball with the properties predicted by QCD would strongly confirm the theory. In principle, if glueballs could be definitively ruled out, this would be a serious experimental blow to QCD. But, as of 2013, scientists are unable to confirm or deny the existence of glueballs definitively, despite the fact that particle accelerators have sufficient energy to generate them.\n\nThere are unexpected cross-relations to solid state physics. For example, the notion of gauge invariance forms the basis of the well-known Mattis spin glasses, which are systems with the usual spin degrees of freedom formula_8 for \"i\" =1...,N, with the special fixed \"random\" couplings formula_9 Here the ε and ε quantities can independently and \"randomly\" take the values ±1, which corresponds to a most-simple gauge transformation formula_10 This means that thermodynamic expectation values of measurable quantities, e.g. of the energy formula_11 are invariant.\n\nHowever, here the \"coupling degrees of freedom\" formula_12, which in the QCD correspond to the \"gluons\", are \"frozen\" to fixed values (quenching). In contrast, in the QCD they \"fluctuate\" (annealing), and through the large number of gauge degrees of freedom the entropy plays an important role (see below).\n\nFor positive \"J\" the thermodynamics of the Mattis spin glass corresponds in fact simply to a \"ferromagnet in disguise\", just because these systems have no \"frustration\" at all. This term is a basic measure in spin glass theory. Quantitatively it is identical with the loop product formula_13 along a closed loop \"W\". However, for a Mattis spin glass – in contrast to \"genuine\" spin glasses – the quantity \"P\" never becomes negative.\n\nThe basic notion \"frustration\" of the spin-glass is actually similar to the Wilson loop quantity of the QCD. The only difference is again that in the QCD one is dealing with SU(3) matrices, and that one is dealing with a \"fluctuating\" quantity. Energetically, perfect absence of frustration should be non-favorable and atypical for a spin glass, which means that one should add the loop product to the Hamiltonian, by some kind of term representing a \"punishment\". In the QCD the Wilson loop is essential for the Lagrangian rightaway.\n\nThe relation between the QCD and \"disordered magnetic systems\" (the spin glasses belong to them) were additionally stressed in a paper by Fradkin, Huberman and Shenker, which also stresses the notion of duality.\n\nA further analogy consists in the already mentioned similarity to polymer physics, where, analogously to Wilson Loops, so-called \"entangled nets\" appear, which are important for the formation of the entropy-elasticity (force proportional to the length) of a rubber band. The non-abelian character of the SU(3) corresponds thereby to the non-trivial \"chemical links\", which glue different loop segments together, and \"asymptotic freedom\" means in the polymer analogy simply the fact that in the short-wave limit, i.e. for formula_14 (where \"R\" is a characteristic correlation length for the glued loops, corresponding to the above-mentioned \"bag radius\", while λ is the wavelength of an excitation) any non-trivial correlation vanishes totally, as if the system had crystallized.\n\nThere is also a correspondence between confinement in QCD – the fact that the color field is only different from zero in the interior of hadrons – and the behaviour of the usual magnetic field in the theory of type-II superconductors: there the magnetism is confined to the interiour of the Abrikosov flux-line lattice,   i.e., the London penetration depth \"λ\" of that theory is analogous to the confinement radius \"R\" of quantum chromodynamics. Mathematically, this correspondendence is supported by the second term, formula_15 on the r.h.s. of the Lagrangian.\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "25265", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25265", "title": "Queue (abstract data type)", "text": "Queue (abstract data type)\n\nIn computer science, a queue ( ) is a particular kind of abstract data type or collection in which the entities in the collection are kept in order and the principal (or only) operations on the collection are the addition of entities to the rear terminal position, known as \"enqueue,\" and removal of entities from the front terminal position, known as \"dequeue\". This makes the queue a First-In-First-Out (FIFO) data structure. In a FIFO data structure, the first element added to the queue will be the first one to be removed. This is equivalent to the requirement that once a new element is added, all elements that were added before have to be removed before the new element can be removed. Often a \"peek\" or \"front\" operation is also entered, returning the value of the front element without dequeuing it. A queue is an example of a linear data structure, or more abstractly a sequential collection.\n\nQueues provide services in computer science, transport, and operations research where various entities such as data, objects, persons, or events are stored and held to be processed later. In these contexts, the queue performs the function of a buffer.\n\nQueues are common in computer programs, where they are implemented as data structures coupled with access routines, as an abstract data structure or in object-oriented languages as classes. Common implementations are circular buffers and linked lists.\n\nTheoretically, one characteristic of a queue is that it does not have a specific capacity. Regardless of how many elements are already contained, a new element can always be added. It can also be empty, at which point removing an element will be impossible until a new element has been added again.\n\nFixed length arrays are limited in capacity, but it is not true that items need to be copied towards the head of the queue. The simple trick of turning the array into a closed circle and letting the head and tail drift around endlessly in that circle makes it unnecessary to ever move items stored in the array. If n is the size of the array, then computing indices modulo n will turn the array into a circle. This is still the conceptually simplest way to construct a queue in a high level language, but it does admittedly slow things down a little, because the array indices must be compared to zero and the array size, which is comparable to the time taken to check whether an array index is out of bounds, which some languages do, but this will certainly be the method of choice for a quick and dirty implementation, or for any high level language that does not have pointer syntax. The array size must be declared ahead of time, but some implementations simply double the declared array size when overflow occurs. Most modern languages with objects or pointers can implement or come with libraries for dynamic lists. Such data structures may have not specified fixed capacity limit besides memory constraints. Queue \"overflow\" results from trying to add an element onto a full queue and queue \"underflow\" happens when trying to remove an element from an empty queue.\n\nA \"bounded queue\" is a queue limited to a fixed number of items.\n\nThere are several efficient implementations of FIFO queues. An efficient implementation is one that can perform the operations—enqueuing and dequeuing—in O(1) time.\n\nQueues may be implemented as a separate data type, or may be considered a special case of a double-ended queue (deque) and not implemented separately. For example, Perl and Ruby allow pushing and popping an array from both ends, so one can use push and shift functions to enqueue and dequeue a list (or, in reverse, one can use unshift and pop), although in some cases these operations are not efficient.\n\nC++'s Standard Template Library provides a \"codice_1\" templated class which is restricted to only push/pop operations. Since J2SE5.0, Java's library contains a interface that specifies queue operations; implementing classes include and (since J2SE 1.6) . PHP has an SplQueue class and third party libraries like beanstalk'd and Gearman.\n\nA simple queue implemented in Ruby:\n\nQueues can also be implemented as a purely functional data structure. Two versions of the implementation exists. The first one, called real-time queue, presented below, allows the queue to be persistent with operations in O(1) worst-case time, but requires lazy lists with memoization. The second one, with no lazy lists nor memoization is presented at the end of the sections. Its amortized time is formula_1 if the persistency is not used; but its worst-time complexity is formula_2 where \"n\" is the number of elements in the queue.\n\nLet us recall that, for formula_3 a list, formula_4 denotes its length, that \"NIL\" represents an empty list and formula_5 represents the list whose head is \"h\" and whose tail is \"t\".\n\nThe data structure used to implements our queues consists of three linked lists formula_6 where \"f\" is the front of the queue, \"r\" is the rear of the queue in reverse order. The invariant of the structure is that \"s\" is the rear of \"f\" without its formula_7 first elements, that is formula_8. The tail of the queue formula_9 is then almost formula_6 and\ninserting an element \"x\" to formula_6 is almost formula_12. It is said almost, because in both of those results, formula_13. An auxiliary function formula_14 must then be called for the invariant to be satisfied. Two cases must be considered, depending on whether formula_15 is the empty list, in which case formula_16, or not. The formal definition is formula_17 and formula_18 where formula_19 is \"f\" followed by \"r\" reversed.\n\nLet us call formula_20 the function which returns \"f\" followed by \"r\" reversed. Let us furthermore assume that formula_16, since it is the case when this function is called. More precisely, we define a lazy function formula_22 which takes as input three list such that formula_16, and return the concatenation of \"f\", of \"r\" reversed and of \"a\". Then formula_24.\nThe inductive definition of rotate is formula_25 and formula_26. Its running time is formula_27, but, since lazy evaluation is used, the computation is delayed until the results is forced by the computation.\n\nThe list \"s\" in the data structure has two purposes. This list serves as a counter for formula_28, indeed, formula_29 if and only if \"s\" is the empty list. This counter allows us to ensure that the rear is never longer than the front list. Furthermore, using \"s\", which is a tail of \"f\", forces the computation of a part of the (lazy) list \"f\" during each \"tail\" and \"insert\" operation. Therefore, when formula_29, the list \"f\" is totally forced. If it was not the case, the internal representation of \"f\" could be some append of append of... of append, and forcing would not be a constant time operation anymore.\n\nNote that, without the lazy part of the implementation, the real-time queue would be a non-persistent implementation of queue in formula_1 amortized time. In this case, the list \"s\" can be replaced by the integer formula_28, and the reverse function would be called when formula_15 is 0.\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "25266", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25266", "title": "Quake (video game)", "text": "Quake (video game)\n\nQuake is a first-person shooter video game, developed by id Software and published by GT Interactive in 1996. It is the first game in the \"Quake\" series. In the game, players must find their way through various maze-like, medieval environments while battling a variety of monsters using a wide array of weapons.\n\nThe successor to id Software's \"Doom\" series, \"Quake\" built upon the technology and gameplay of its predecessor. Unlike the \"Doom\" engine before it, the \"Quake\" engine offered full real-time 3D rendering and had early support for 3D acceleration through OpenGL. After \"Doom\" helped popularize multiplayer deathmatches, \"Quake\" added various multiplayer options. Online multiplayer became increasingly common, with the QuakeWorld update and software such as QuakeSpy making the process of finding and playing against others on the Internet easier and more reliable. It features music composed by Trent Reznor and Nine Inch Nails.\n\nIn \"Quake\" single-player mode, players explore and navigate to the exit of each Gothic and dark level, facing monsters and finding secret areas along the way. Usually there are switches to activate or keys to collect in order to open doors before the exit can be reached. Reaching the exit takes the player to the next level. Before accessing an episode, there is a set of three pathways with easy, medium, and hard skill levels. The fourth skill level, \"Nightmare\", was \"so bad that it was hidden, so people won't wander in by accident\"; the player must drop through water before the episode four entrance and go into a secret passage to access it.\n\n\"Quake\" single-player campaign is organized into four individual episodes with seven to eight levels in each (including one secret level per episode, one of which is a \"low gravity\" level that challenges the player's abilities in a different way). As items are collected, they are carried to the next level, each usually more challenging than the last. If the player's character dies, he must restart at the beginning of the level. The game may be saved at any time. Upon completing an episode, the player is returned to the hub \"START\" level, where another episode can be chosen. Each episode starts the player from scratch, without any previously collected items. Episode one (which formed the shareware or downloadable demo version of \"Quake\") has the most traditional ideology of a boss in the last level. The ultimate objective at the end of each episode is to recover a magic rune. After all of the runes are collected, the floor of the hub level opens up to reveal an entrance to the \"END\" level which contains the final boss of the game.\n\nIn multiplayer mode, players on several computers connect to a server (which may be a dedicated machine or on one of the player's computers), where they can either play the single-player campaign together in co-op mode, or play against each other in multiplayer. When players die in multiplayer mode, they can immediately respawn, but will lose any items that were collected. Similarly, items that have been picked up previously respawn after some time, and may be picked up again. The most popular multiplayer modes are all forms of deathmatch. Deathmatch modes typically consist of either \"free-for-all\" (no organization or teams involved), one-on-one \"duels\", or organized \"teamplay\" with two or more players per team (or clan). Teamplay is also frequently played with one or another mod. Monsters are not normally present in teamplay, as they serve no purpose other than to get in the way and reveal the positions of the players.\n\nThe gameplay in \"Quake\" was considered unique for its time because of the different ways the player can maneuver through the game. For example: bunny hopping or strafe jumping can be used to move faster than normal, while rocket jumping enables the player to reach otherwise-inaccessible areas at the cost of some self-damage. The player can start and stop moving suddenly, jump unnaturally high, and change direction while moving through the air. Many of these non-realistic behaviors contribute to \"Quake\"s appeal. Multiplayer \"Quake\" was one of the first games singled out as a form of electronic sport. A notable participant was Dennis Fong who won John Carmack's Ferrari 328 at the Microsoft-sponsored Red Annihilation tournament in 1997.\n\nIn the single-player game, the player takes the role of the protagonist known as Ranger (voiced by Trent Reznor) who was sent into a portal in order to stop an enemy code-named \"Quake\". The government had been experimenting with teleportation technology and developed a working prototype called a \"Slipgate\"; the mysterious Quake compromised the Slipgate by connecting it with its own teleportation system, using it to send death squads to the \"Human\" dimension in order to test the martial capabilities of humanity.\n\nThe sole surviving protagonist in \"Operation Counterstrike\" is Ranger, who must advance, starting each of the four episodes from an overrun human military base, before fighting his way into other dimensions, reaching them via the Slipgate or their otherworld equivalent. After passing through the Slipgate, Ranger's main objective is to collect four magic runes from four dimensions of Quake; these are the key to stopping the enemy later discovered as Shub-Niggurath and ending the invasion of Earth.\n\nThe single-player campaign consists of 30 separate levels, or \"maps\", divided into four episodes (with a total of 26 regular maps and four secret ones), as well as a hub level to select a difficulty setting and episode, and the game's final boss level. Each episode represents individual dimensions that the player can access through magical portals (as opposed to the technological Slipgate) that are discovered over the course of the game. The various realms consist of a number of gothic, medieval, and lava-filled caves and dungeons, with a recurring theme of hellish and satanic imagery reminiscent of \"Doom\" (such as pentagrams and images of demons on the walls). The latter is inspired by several dark fantasy influences, most notably that of H. P. Lovecraft. Dimensional Shamblers appear as enemies, the \"Spawn\" enemies are called \"Formless Spawn of Tsathoggua\" in the manual, the boss of the first episode is named Chthon, and the final boss is named Shub-Niggurath (though actually resembling a Dark Young). Some levels have Lovecraftian names, such as the Vaults of Zin and The Nameless City. In addition, six levels exclusively designed for multiplayer deathmatch are also included. Originally, the game was supposed to include more Lovecraftian bosses, but this concept was scrapped due to time constraints.\n\nA preview included with id's very first release, 1990's \"Commander Keen\", advertised a game entitled \"The Fight for Justice\" as a follow-up to the \"Commander Keen\" trilogy. It would feature a character named Quake, \"the strongest, most dangerous person on the continent\", armed with thunderbolts and a \"Ring of Regeneration\". Conceived as a VGA full-color side-scrolling role-playing game, \"The Fight for Justice\" was never released.\n\nLead designer and director, John Romero, later conceived of \"Quake\" as an action game taking place in a fully 3D world, inspired by Sega AM2's 3D fighting game \"Virtua Fighter\". \"Quake\" was also intended to feature \"Virtua Fighter\" influenced third-person melee combat. However, id Software considered it to be risky. Because the project was taking too long, the third-person melee was eventually dropped. This led to creative differences between Romero and id Software, and eventually his departure from the company after \"Quake\" was released.\n\n\"Quake\" was given as a title to the game that id Software was working on shortly after the release of \"\". The earliest information released described \"Quake\" as focusing on a Thor-like character who wields a giant hammer, and is able to knock away enemies by throwing the hammer (complete with real-time inverse kinematics). Initially, the levels were supposed to be designed in an Aztec style, but the choice was dropped some months into the project. Early screenshots then showed medieval environments and dragons. The plan was for the game to have more RPG-style elements. However, work was very slow on the engine, since John Carmack, the main programmer of \"Quake\", was not only developing a fully 3D engine, but also a TCP/IP networking model (Carmack later said that he should have done two separate projects which developed those things).\n\nEventually, the whole id Software team began to think that the original concept may not have been as wise a choice as they first believed. Thus, the final game was very stripped down from its original intentions, and instead featured gameplay similar to \"Doom\" and its sequel, although the levels and enemies were closer to medieval RPG style rather than science-fiction. In a December 1, 1994 post to an online bulletin board, John Romero wrote, \"Okay, people. It seems that everyone is speculating on whether Quake is going to be a slow, RPG-style light-action game. Wrong! What does id do best and dominate at? Can you say \"action\"? I knew you could. Quake will be constant, hectic action throughout – probably more so than Doom.\"\n\n\"Quake\" was programmed by John Carmack, Michael Abrash, and John Cash. The levels and scenarios were designed by American McGee, Sandy Petersen, John Romero, and Tim Willits, and the graphics were designed by Adrian Carmack, Kevin Cloud and Paul Steed. Cloud created the monster and player graphics using Alias.\n\nThe music and sound design was done by Trent Reznor, founder of Nine Inch Nails, using ambient soundscapes and synthesized drones to create atmospheric tracks. In an interview, Reznor remarked that the \"Quake\" soundtrack \"is not music, it's textures and ambiences and whirling machine noises and stuff. We tried to make the most sinister, depressive, scary, frightening kind of thing... It's been fun.\" The game also has some ammo boxes decorated with the Nine Inch Nails logo.\n\nThe game engine developed for \"Quake\", the \"Quake\" engine, popularized several major advances in the first-person shooter genre: polygonal models instead of prerendered sprites; full 3D level design instead of a 2.5D map; prerendered lightmaps; and allowing end users to partially program the game (in this case with QuakeC), which popularized fan-created modifications (mods).\n\nBefore the release of the full game or the shareware version of \"Quake\", id Software released \"QTest\" on February 24, 1996. It was described as a technology demo and was limited to three multiplayer maps. There was no single-player support and some of the gameplay and graphics were unfinished or different from their final versions. \"QTest\" gave gamers their first peek into the filesystem and modifiability of the \"Quake\" engine, and many entity mods (that placed monsters in the otherwise empty multiplayer maps) and custom player skins began appearing online before the full game was even released.\n\nInitially, the game was designed so that when the player ran out of ammunition, the player character would hit enemies with a gun-butt. Shortly before release this was replaced with an axe.\n\nThe first ports to be completed were the Linux and SPARC Solaris ports by id Software employee Dave D. Taylor in 1996. The first commercially released port was the 1997 port to Mac OS, done by MacSoft. ClickBOOM announced version for Amiga-computers in 1998. Finally in 1999, a retail version of the Linux port was distributed by Macmillan Digital Publishing USA in a bundle with the three add-ons as \"Quake: The Offering\".\n\n\"Quake\" was also ported to home console systems. On October 31, 1997, the game was ported to the Sega Saturn by Lobotomy Software. The Sega Saturn port used Lobotomy Software's own 3D game engine, \"SlaveDriver\" (the same game engine that powered the Sega Saturn versions of \"PowerSlave\" and \"Duke Nukem 3D\"), instead of the original \"Quake\" engine. It is the only version of \"Quake\" that is rated \"T\" for Teen instead of \"M\" for Mature. \"Quake\" had also been ported to the Sony PlayStation by Lobotomy Software, but the port was cancelled due to the lack of being able to find a publisher. On March 24, 1998, the game was ported to the Nintendo 64 by Midway Games. Both console ports required compromises because of the limited CPU power and ROM storage space for levels. The Sega Saturn version includes 28 of the 32 single-player levels from the original PC version of the game, though the secret levels, Ziggurat Vertigo (E1M8), The Underearth (E2M7), The Haunted Halls (E3M7), and The Nameless City (E4M8), were removed. Instead, it has four exclusive secret levels: Purgatorium, Hell's Aerie, The Coliseum, and Watery Grave. It also contains an exclusive unlockable, \"Dank & Scuz\", which is a story set in the Quake milieu and presented in the form of a slide show with voice acting. There are no multiplayer modes in the Sega Saturn version; as a result of this, all of the deathmatch maps from the PC version were removed from the Sega Saturn port. The Nintendo 64 version includes 25 single-player levels from the PC version, though it is missing The Grisly Grotto (E1M4), The Installation (E2M1), The Ebon Fortress (E2M4), The Wind Tunnels (E3M5), The Sewage System (E4M1), and Hell's Atrium (E4M5) levels. It also does not use the hub \"START\" map where the player chooses a difficulty level and an episode; the difficulty level is chosen from a menu when starting the game, and all of the levels are played in sequential order from The Slipgate Complex (E1M1) to Shub Niggurath's Pit (END). The Nintendo 64 version, while lacking the cooperative multiplayer mode, includes two player deathmatch. All six of the deathmatch maps from the PC version are in the Nintendo 64 port, and an exclusive deathmatch level, The Court of Death, is also included.\n\nTwo ports of \"Quake\" for the Nintendo DS exist, \"QuakeDS\" and \"CQuake\". Both run well, however, multiplayer does not work on \"QuakeDS\". Since the source code for \"Quake\" was released, a number of unofficial ports have been made available for PDAs and mobile phones, such as PocketQuake, as well as versions for the Symbian S60 series of mobile phones and Android mobile phones.\n\nIn 2005, id Software signed a deal with publisher Pulse Interactive to release a version of \"Quake\" for mobile phones. The game was engineered by Californian company Bear Naked Productions. Initially due to be released on only two mobile phones, the Samsung Nexus (for which it was to be an embedded game) and the LG VX360. Quake mobile was reviewed by GameSpot on the Samsung Nexus and they cited its US release as October 2005; they also gave it a \"Best Mobile Game\" in their E3 2005 Editor's Choice Awards. \"It is unclear as to whether the game actually did ship with the Samsung Nexus. The game is only available for the DELL x50v and x51v both of which are PDAs not mobile phones. \"Quake Mobile\" does not feature the Nine Inch Nails soundtrack due to space constraints. \"Quake Mobile\" runs the most recent version of GL Quake (Quake v.1.09 GL 1.00) at 800x600 resolution and 25 fps. The most recent version of \"Quake Mobile\" is v.1.20 which has stylus support. There was an earlier version v.1.19 which lacked stylus support. The two \"Quake\" expansion packs, \"Scourge of Armagon\" and \"Dissolution of Eternity\", are also available for \"Quake Mobile\".\n\nA Flash-based version of the game by Michael Rennie runs \"Quake\" at full speed in any Flash-enabled web browser. Based on the shareware version of the game, it includes only the first episode and is available for free on the web.\n\n\"Quake\" can be heavily modified by altering the graphics, audio, or scripting in QuakeC, and has been the focus of many fan created \"mods\". The first mods were small gameplay fixes and patches initiated by the community, usually enhancements to weapons or gameplay with new enemies. Later mods were more ambitious and resulted in \"Quake\" fans creating versions of the game that were drastically different from id Software's original release.\n\nThe first major \"Quake\" mod was \"Team Fortress\". This mod consists of Capture the Flag gameplay with a class system for the players. Players choose a class, which creates various restrictions on weapons and armor types available to that player, and also grants special abilities. For example, the bread-and-butter \"Soldier\" class has medium armor, medium speed, and a well-rounded selection of weapons and grenades, while the \"Scout\" class is lightly armored, very fast, has a scanner that detects nearby enemies, but has very weak offensive weapons. One of the other differences with CTF is the fact that the flag is not returned automatically when a player drops it: running over one's flag in \"Threewave CTF\" would return the flag to the base, and in \"TF\" the flag remains in the same spot for preconfigured time and it has to be defended on remote locations. This caused a shift in defensive tactics compared to \"Threewave CTF\". \"Team Fortress\" maintained its standing as the most-played online \"Quake\" modification for many years.\n\nAnother popular mod was \"Threewave Capture the Flag\" (CTF), primarily authored by Dave 'Zoid' Kirsch. \"Threewave CTF\" is a partial conversion consisting of new levels, a new weapon (a grappling hook), power-ups, new textures, and new gameplay rules. Typically, two teams (red and blue) would compete in a game of Capture the flag, though a few maps with up to four teams (red, blue, green, and yellow) were created. Capture the Flag soon became a standard game mode included in most popular multiplayer games released after \"Quake\". \"Rocket Arena\" provides the ability for players to face each other in small, open arenas with changes in the gameplay rules so that item collection and detailed level knowledge are no longer factors. A series of short rounds, with the surviving player in each round gaining a point, instead tests the player's aiming and dodging skills and reflexes. \"Clan Arena\" is a further modification that provides team play using \"Rocket Arena\" rules. One mod category, \"bots\", was introduced to provide surrogate players in multiplayer mode.\n\nThere are a large number of custom levels that have been made by users and fans of \"Quake\". , new maps are still being made, over twenty years since the game's release. Custom maps are new maps that are playable by loading them into the original game. Custom levels of various gameplay types have been made, but most are in the single-player and deathmatch genres. More than 1500 single-player and a similar number of deathmatch maps have been made for \"Quake\".\n\n\"Quake\" was critically acclaimed on the PC. Aggregating review websites GameRankings and Metacritic gave the original PC version 93.22% and 94/100, the Nintendo 64 port 76.14% and 74/100, and the Sega Saturn version 64.50%.\n\nIn 1996, \"Computer Gaming World\" listed \"telefragged\" as #1 on its list of \"the 15 best ways to die in computer gaming\".. In 1997, the Game Developers Choice Awards gave Quake three spotlight awards for Best Sound Effects, Best Music or Soundtrack and Best On-Line/Internet Game.\n\nAs an example of the dedication that \"Quake\" has inspired in its fan community, a group of expert players recorded speedrun demos (replayable recordings of the player's movement) of \"Quake\" levels completed in record time on the \"Nightmare\" skill level. The footage was edited into a continuous 19 minutes, 49 seconds demo called \"Quake done Quick\" and released on June 10, 1997. Owners of \"Quake\" could replay this demo in the game engine, watching the run unfold as if they were playing it themselves.\n\nThis involved a number of players recording run-throughs of individual levels, using every trick and shortcut they could discover in order to minimize the time it took to complete, usually to a degree that even the original level designers found difficult to comprehend, and in a manner that often bypassed large areas of the level. Stitching a series of the fastest runs together into a coherent whole created a demonstration of the entire game. \"Recamming\" is also used with speedruns in order to make the experience more movie-like, with arbitrary control of camera angles, editing, and sound that can be applied with editing software after the runs are first recorded. However, the fastest possible time for a given level will not necessarily result in the fastest time used to contribute to \"running\" the entire game. One example is acquiring the grenade launcher in an early level, an act that slows down the time for that level over the best possible, but speeds up the overall game time by allowing the runner to bypass a big area in a later level that they could not otherwise do.\n\nA second attempt, \"Quake done Quicker\", reduced the completion time to 16 minutes, 35 seconds (a reduction of 3 minutes, 14 seconds). \"Quake done Quicker\" was released on September 13, 1997. One of the levels included was the result of an online competition to see who could get the fastest time. The culmination of this process of improvement was \"Quake done Quick with a Vengeance\". Released three years to the day after \"Quake done Quicker\", this pared down the time taken to complete all four episodes, on Nightmare (hardest) difficulty, to 12 minutes, 23 seconds (a further reduction of 4 minutes, 12 seconds), partly by using techniques that had formerly been shunned in such films as being less aesthetically pleasing. This run was recorded as an in-game demo, but interest was such that an .avi video clip was created to allow those without the game to see the run.\n\nMost full-game speedruns are a collaborative effort by a number of runners (though some have been done by single runners on their own). Although each particular level is credited to one runner, the ideas and techniques used are iterative and collaborative in nature, with each runner picking up tips and ideas from the others, so that speeds keep improving beyond what was thought possible as the runs are further optimized and new tricks or routes are discovered. Further time improvements of the continuous whole game run were achieved into the 21st century. In addition, many thousands of individual level runs are kept at Speed Demos Archive's \"Quake\" section, including many on custom maps. Speedrunning is a counterpart to multiplayer modes in making \"Quake\" one of the first games promoted as a virtual sport.\n\nThe source code of the \"Quake\" and \"QuakeWorld\" engines was licensed under the GPL on December 21, 1999. The id Software maps, objects, textures, sounds, and other creative works remain under their original proprietary license. The shareware distribution of \"Quake\" is still freely redistributable and usable with the GPLed engine code. One must purchase a copy of \"Quake\" in order to receive the registered version of the game which includes more single-player episodes and the deathmatch maps. Based on the success of the first \"Quake\" game, and later published \"Quake II\" and \"Quake III Arena\"; \"Quake 4\" was released in October 2005, developed by Raven Software using the \"Doom 3\" engine.\n\n\"Quake\" was the game primarily responsible for the emergence of the machinima artform of films made in game engines, thanks to edited \"Quake\" demos such as \"Ranger Gone Bad\" and \"Blahbalicious\", the in-game film \"The Devil's Covenant\", and the in-game-rendered, four-hour epic film \"The Seal of Nehahra\". On June 22, 2006, it had been 10 years since the original uploading of the game to cdrom.com archives. Many Internet forums had topics about it, and it was a front page story on Slashdot. On October 11, 2006, John Romero released the original map files for all of the levels in \"Quake\" under the GPL.\n\n\"Quake\" has four sequels, \"Quake II\", \"Quake III Arena\", \"Quake 4\", and \"\". In 2002, a version of \"Quake\" was produced for mobile phones. A copy of \"Quake\" was also released as a compilation in 2001, labeled \"Ultimate Quake\", which included the original \"Quake\", \"Quake II\", and \"Quake III Arena\" which was published by Activision. In 2008, \"Quake\" was honored at the 59th Annual Technology & Engineering Emmy Awards for advancing the art form of user modifiable games. John Carmack accepted the award. Years after its original release, \"Quake\" is still regarded by many critics as one of the greatest and most influential games ever made.\n\nThere were two official expansion packs released for \"Quake\". The expansion packs pick up where the first game left off, include all of the same weapons, power-ups, monsters, and gothic atmosphere/architecture, and continue/finish the story of the first game and its protagonist. An unofficial third expansion pack, \"Abyss of Pandemonium\", was developed by the Impel Development Team, published by Perfect Publishing, and released on April 14, 1998; an updated version, version 2.0, titled \"Abyss of Pandemonium – The Final Mission\" was released as freeware. In honor of \"Quake\"'s 20th anniversary, MachineGames, an internal development studio of ZeniMax Media, who are the current owners of the \"Quake\" IP, released online a new expansion pack for free, called \"Episode 5: Dimension of the Past\".\n\n\"Quake Mission Pack No. 1: Scourge of Armagon\" was the first official mission pack, released on February 28, 1997. Developed by Hipnotic Interactive, it features three episodes divided into seventeen new single-player levels (three of which are secret), a new multiplayer level, a new soundtrack composed by Jeehun Hwang, and gameplay features not originally present in \"Quake\", including rotating structures and breakable walls. Unlike the main \"Quake\" game and Mission Pack No. 2, \"Scourge\" does away with the episode hub, requiring the three episodes to be played sequentially. The three new enemies include Centroids, large cybernetic scorpions with nailguns; Gremlins, small goblins that can steal weapons and multiply by feeding on enemy corpses; and Spike Mines, floating orbs that detonate when near the player. The three new weapons include the Mjolnir, a large lightning emitting hammer; the Laser Cannon, which shoots bouncing bolts of energy; and the Proximity Mine Launcher, which fires grenades that attach to surfaces and detonate when an opponent comes near. The three new power-ups include the Horn of Conjuring, which summons an enemy to protect the player; the Empathy Shield, which halves the damage taken by the player between the player and the attacking enemy; and the Wetsuit, which renders the player invulnerable to electricity and allows the player to stay underwater for a period of time. The storyline follows Armagon, a general of Quake's forces, planning to invade Earth via a portal known as the 'Rift'. Armagon resembles a giant gremlin with cybernetic legs and a combined rocket launcher/laser cannon for arms.\n\n\"Quake Mission Pack No. 2: Dissolution of Eternity\" was the second official mission pack, released on March 31, 1997. Developed by Rogue Entertainment, it features two episodes divided into fifteen new single-player levels, a new multiplayer level, a new soundtrack, and several new enemies and bosses. Notably, the pack lacks secret levels. The eight new enemies include Electric Eels, Phantom Swordsmen, Multi-Grenade Ogres (which fire cluster grenades), Hell Spawn, Wraths (floating, robed undead), Guardians (resurrected ancient Egyptian warriors), Mummies, and statues of various enemies that can come to life. The four new types of bosses include Lava Men, Overlords, large Wraths, and a dragon guarding the \"temporal energy converter\". The two new power-ups include the Anti Grav Belt, which allows the player to jump higher; and the Power Shield, which lowers the damage the player receives. Rather than offering new weapons, the mission pack gives the player four new types of ammo for existing weapons, such as \"lava nails\" for the Nailgun, cluster grenades for the Grenade Launcher, rockets that split into four in a horizontal line for the Rocket Launcher, and plasma cells for the Thunderbolt, as well as a grappling hook to help with moving around the levels.\n\nIn late 1996, id Software released \"VQuake\", a port of the \"Quake\" engine to support hardware accelerated rendering on graphics cards using the Rendition Vérité chipset. Aside from the expected benefit of improved performance, \"VQuake\" offered numerous visual improvements over the original software-rendered \"Quake\". It boasted full 16-bit color, bilinear filtering (reducing pixelation), improved dynamic lighting, optional anti-aliasing, and improved source code clarity, as the improved performance finally allowed the use of gotos to be abandoned in favor of proper loop constructs. As the name implied, \"VQuake\" was a proprietary port specifically for the Vérité; consumer 3D acceleration was in its infancy at the time, and there was no standard 3D API for the consumer market. After completing \"VQuake\", John Carmack vowed to never write a proprietary port again, citing his frustration with Rendition's Speedy3D API.\n\nTo improve the quality of online play, id Software released \"QuakeWorld\" on December 17, 1996, a build of \"Quake\" that featured significantly revamped network code including the addition of client-side prediction. The original \"Quake\" network code would not show the player the results of his actions until the server sent back a reply acknowledging them. For example, if the player attempted to move forward, his client would send the request to move forward to the server, and the server would determine whether the client was actually able to move forward or if he ran into an obstacle, such as a wall or another player. The server would then respond to the client, and only then would the client display movement to the player. This was fine for play on a LAN, a high bandwidth, very low latency connection, but the latency over a dial-up Internet connection is much larger than on a LAN, and this caused a noticeable delay between when a player tried to act and when that action was visible on the screen. This made gameplay much more difficult, especially since the unpredictable nature of the Internet made the amount of delay vary from moment to moment. Players would experience jerky, laggy motion that sometimes felt like ice skating, where they would slide around with seemingly no ability to stop, due to a build-up of previously-sent movement requests. John Carmack has admitted that this was a serious problem which should have been fixed before release, but it was not caught because he and other developers had high-speed Internet access at home.\n\nWith the help of client-side prediction, which allowed players to see their own movement immediately without waiting for a response from the server, \"QuakeWorld\" network code allowed players with high-latency connections to control their character's movement almost as precisely as when playing in single-player mode. The Netcode parameters could be adjusted by the user so that \"QuakeWorld\" performed well for users with high and low latency.\n\nThe trade off to client-side prediction was that sometimes other players or objects would no longer be quite where they had appeared to be, or, in extreme cases, that the player would be pulled back to a previous position when the client received a late reply from the server which overrode movement the client had already previewed; this was known as \"warping\". As a result, some serious players, particularly in the U.S., still preferred to play online using the original \"Quake\" engine (commonly called \"NetQuake\") rather than \"QuakeWorld\". However, the majority of players, especially those on dial-up connections, preferred the newer network model, and \"QuakeWorld\" soon became the dominant form of online play. Following the success of \"QuakeWorld\", client-side prediction has become a standard feature of nearly all real-time online games. As with all other \"Quake\" upgrades, \"QuakeWorld\" was released as a free, unsupported add-on to the game and was updated numerous times through 1998.\n\nOn January 22, 1997, id Software released \"GLQuake\". This was designed to use the OpenGL 3D API to access hardware 3D graphics acceleration cards to rasterize the graphics, rather than having the computer's CPU fill in every pixel. In addition to higher framerates for most players, \"GLQuake\" provided higher resolution modes and texture filtering. \"GLQuake\" also experimented with reflections, transparent water, and even rudimentary shadows. \"GLQuake\" came with a driver enabling the subset of OpenGL used by the game to function on the 3dfx \"Voodoo Graphics\" card, the only consumer-level card at the time capable of running \"GLQuake\" well. Previously, John Carmack had experimented with a version of Quake specifically written for the Rendition Vérité chip used in the Creative Labs \"PCI 3D Blaster\" card. This version had met with only limited success, and Carmack decided to write for generic APIs in the future rather than tailoring for specific hardware.\n\nOn March 11, 1997, id Software released \"WinQuake\", a version of the non-OpenGL engine designed to run under Microsoft Windows; the original \"Quake\" had been written for DOS, allowing for launch from Windows 95, but could not run under Windows NT-based operating systems because it required direct access to hardware. \"WinQuake\" instead accessed hardware via Win32-based APIs such as DirectSound, DirectInput, and DirectDraw that were supported on Windows 95, Windows NT 4.0 and later releases. Like \"GLQuake\", \"WinQuake\" also allowed higher resolution video modes. This removed the last barrier to widespread popularity of the game. In 1998, LBE Systems and Laser-Tron released \"Quake: Arcade Tournament Edition\" in the arcades in limited quantities.\n\nTo celebrate \"Quake\"'s 20th anniversary, a mission pack was developed by MachineGames and released on June 24, 2016. It features 10 new single-player levels and a new multiplayer level, but does not use new gameplay additions from \"Scourge of Armagon\" and \"Dissolution of Eternity\". Chronologically, it is set between the main game and the expansions.\n\nAfter the departure of Sandy Petersen, the remaining id employees chose to change the thematic direction substantially for \"Quake II\", making the design more technological and futuristic, rather than maintaining the focus on Lovecraftian fantasy. \"Quake 4\" followed the design themes of \"Quake II\", whereas \"Quake III Arena\" mixed these styles; it had a parallel setting that housed several \"id all-stars\" from various games as playable characters. The mixed settings occurred because \"Quake II\" originally began as a separate product line. The id designers were forced to fall back on the project's nickname of \"\"Quake II\"\" due to the failure to gain rights to the title they wanted. Since any sequel to the original \"Quake\" had already been vetoed, it became a way of continuing the series without continuing the storyline or setting of the first game. In June 2011, John Carmack made an offhand comment that id Software was considering a remake to the \"...mixed up Cthulhu-ish Quake 1 world and rebooting [in] that direction.\" There was also another game released called \"Quake Live\" which is the latest game in the series. At E3 2016,Quake Champions was announced at the Bethesda press conference. The game will be a multiplayer-only shooter in the style of Quake 3 Arena and will be released exclusively for Windows.\n\nOn July 20, 2016, Axel Gneiting, an id Tech employee responsible for implementing the Vulkan rendering path to the id Tech 6 engine used in Doom (2016) computer game, released a port called \"vkQuake\" under the GPLv2.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "25267", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25267", "title": "Quantum field theory", "text": "Quantum field theory\n\nIn theoretical physics, quantum field theory (QFT) is the theoretical framework for constructing quantum mechanical models of subatomic particles in particle physics and quasiparticles in condensed matter physics. QFT treats particles as excited states of the underlying field, so these are called field quanta.\n\nIn quantum field theory, quantum mechanical interactions among particles are described by interaction terms among the corresponding underlying quantum fields. These interactions are conveniently visualized by Feynman diagrams, which are a formal tool of relativistically covariant perturbation theory, serving to evaluate particle processes.\n\nEven though QFT is an unavoidable consequence of the reconciliation of quantum mechanics with special relativity (), historically, it emerged \nin the 1920s with the quantization of the electromagnetic field (the quantization being based on an analogy of the eigenmode expansion of a vibrating string with fixed endpoints).\n\nThe first achievement of quantum field theory, namely quantum electrodynamics (QED), is \"still the paradigmatic example of a successful quantum field theory\" (). Ordinarily, quantum mechanics (QM) cannot give an account of photons which constitute the prime case of relativistic 'particles'. Since photons have rest mass zero, and correspondingly travel in the vacuum at the speed \"c\", a non-relativistic theory such as ordinary QM cannot give even an approximate description. Photons are implicit in the emission and absorption processes which have to be postulated; for instance, when one of an atom's electrons makes a transition between energy levels. The formalism of QFT is needed for an explicit description of photons. In fact most topics in the early development of quantum theory (the so-called old quantum theory, 1900–25) were related to the interaction of radiation and matter and thus should be treated by quantum field theoretical methods. However, quantum mechanics as formulated by Dirac, Heisenberg, and Schrödinger in 1926–27 started from atomic spectra and did not focus much on problems of radiation.\n\nAs soon as the conceptual framework of quantum mechanics was developed, a small group of theoreticians tried to extend quantum methods to electromagnetic fields. A good example is the famous paper by . (P. Jordan was especially acquainted with the literature on light quanta and made seminal contributions to QFT.) The basic idea was that in QFT the electromagnetic field should be represented by matrices in the same way that position and momentum were represented in QM by matrices (matrix mechanics oscillator operators). The ideas of QM were thus extended to systems having an infinite number of degrees of freedom, so an infinite array of quantum oscillators.\n\nThe inception of QFT is usually considered to be Dirac's famous 1927 paper on \"The quantum theory of the emission and absorption of radiation\". Here Dirac coined the name \"quantum electrodynamics\" (QED) for the part of QFT that was developed first. Dirac supplied a systematic procedure for transferring the characteristic quantum phenomenon of discreteness of physical quantities from the quantum-mechanical treatment of particles to a corresponding treatment of fields. Employing the theory of the quantum harmonic oscillator, Dirac gave a theoretical description of how photons appear in the quantization of the electromagnetic radiation field. Later, Dirac's procedure became a model for the quantization of other fields as well. These first approaches to QFT were further developed during the following three years. P. Jordan introduced creation and annihilation operators for fields obeying Fermi–Dirac statistics. These differ from the corresponding operators for Bose–Einstein statistics in that the former satisfy \"anti-commutation relations\" while the latter satisfy commutation relations.\n\nThe methods of QFT could be applied to derive equations resulting from the quantum-mechanical (field-like) treatment of particles, e.g. the Dirac equation, the Klein–Gordon equation and the Maxwell equations. Schweber points out that the idea and procedure of second quantization goes back to Jordan, in a number of papers from 1927, while the expression itself was coined by Dirac. Some difficult problems concerning commutation relations, statistics, and Lorentz invariance were eventually solved. The first comprehensive account of a general theory of quantum fields, in particular, the method of canonical quantization, was presented by Heisenberg & Pauli in 1929–30. Whereas Jordan's second quantization procedure applied to the coefficients of the normal modes of the field, Heisenberg & Pauli started with the fields themselves and subjected them to the canonical procedure. Heisenberg and Pauli thus established the basic structure of QFT as presented in modern introductions to QFT. Fermi and Dirac, as well as Fock and Podolsky, presented different formulations which played a heuristic role in the following years.\n\nQuantum electrodynamics rests on two pillars, see e.g., the short and lucid \"Historical Introduction\" of . The first pillar is the quantization of the electromagnetic field, i.e., it is about photons as the quantized excitations or 'quanta' of the electromagnetic field. This procedure will be described in some more detail in the section on the particle interpretation. As Weinberg points out the \"photon is the only particle that was known as a field before it was detected as a particle\" so that it is natural that QED began with the analysis of the radiation field. The second pillar of QED consists of the relativistic theory of the electron, centered on the Dirac equation.\n\nQuantum field theory started with a theoretical framework that was built in analogy to quantum mechanics. Although there was no unique and fully developed theory, quantum field theoretical tools could be applied to concrete processes. Examples are the scattering of radiation by free electrons, Compton scattering, the collision between relativistic electrons or the production of electron-positron pairs by photons. Calculations to the first order of approximation were quite successful, but most people working in the field thought that QFT still had to undergo a major change. On the one side, some calculations of effects for cosmic rays clearly differed from measurements. On the other side and, from a theoretical point of view more threatening, calculations of higher orders of the perturbation series led to infinite results. The self-energy of the electron as well as vacuum fluctuations of the electromagnetic field seemed to be infinite. The perturbation expansions did not converge to a finite sum and even most individual terms were divergent.\n\nThe various forms of infinities suggested that the divergences were more than failures of specific calculations. Many physicists tried to avoid the divergences by formal tricks (truncating the integrals at some value of momentum, or even ignoring infinite terms) but such rules were not reliable, violated the requirements of relativity and were not considered as satisfactory. Others came up with the first ideas for coping with infinities by a redefinition of the parameters of the theory and using a measured finite value, for example of the charge of the electron, instead of the infinite 'bare' value. This process is called renormalization.\n\nFrom the point of view of the philosophy of science, it is remarkable that these divergences did not give enough reason to discard the theory. The years from 1930 to the beginning of World War II were characterized by a variety of attitudes towards QFT. Some physicists tried to circumvent the infinities by more-or-less arbitrary prescriptions, others worked on transformations and improvements of the theoretical framework. Most of the theoreticians believed that QED would break down at high energies. There was also a considerable number of proposals in favor of alternative approaches. These proposals included changes in the basic concepts e.g. negative probabilities and interactions at a distance instead of a field theoretical approach, and a methodological change to phenomenological methods that focusses on relations between observable quantities without an analysis of the microphysical details of the interaction, the so-called S-matrix theory where the basic elements are amplitudes for various scattering processes.\n\nDespite the feeling that QFT was imperfect and lacking rigor, its methods were extended to new areas of applications. In 1933 Fermi's theory of the beta decay started with conceptions describing the emission and absorption of photons, transferred them to beta radiation and analyzed the creation and annihilation of electrons and neutrinos described by the weak interaction. Further applications of QFT outside of quantum electrodynamics succeeded in nuclear physics with the strong interaction. In 1934 Pauli & Weisskopf showed that a new type of field (the scalar field), described by the Klein–Gordon equation, could be quantized. This is another example of second quantization. This new theory for matter fields could be applied a decade later when new particles, pions, were detected.\n\nAfter the end of World War II more reliable and effective methods for dealing with infinities in QFT were developed, namely coherent and systematic rules for performing relativistic field theoretical calculations, and a general renormalization theory. At three famous conferences, the Shelter Island Conference 1947, the Pocono Conference 1948, and the 1949 Oldstone Conference, developments in theoretical physics were confronted with relevant new experimental results. In the late forties, there were two different ways to address the problem of divergences. One of these was discovered by Richard Feynman, the other one (based on an operator formalism) by Julian Schwinger and, independently, by Shin'ichirō Tomonaga.\n\nIn 1949, Freeman Dyson showed that the two approaches are in fact equivalent and fit into an elegant field-theoretic framework. Thus, Freeman Dyson, Feynman, Schwinger, and Tomonaga became the inventors of renormalization theory. The most spectacular successes of renormalization theory were the calculations of the anomalous magnetic moment of the electron and the Lamb shift in the spectrum of hydrogen. These successes were so outstanding because the theoretical results were in better agreement with high-precision experiments than anything in physics encountered before. Nevertheless, mathematical problems lingered on and prompted a search for rigorous formulations (discussed \nbelow).\n\nThe rationale behind renormalization is to avoid divergences that appear in physical predictions by shifting them into a part of the theory where they do not influence empirical statements. Dyson could show that a rescaling of charge and mass ('renormalization') is sufficient to remove all divergences in QED consistently, to all orders of perturbation theory. A QFT is called renormalizable if all infinities can be absorbed into a redefinition of a \"finite number\" of coupling constants and masses. A consequence for QED is that the physical charge and mass of the electron must be measured and cannot be computed from first principles.\n\nPerturbation theory yields well-defined predictions only in renormalizable quantum field theories; luckily, QED, the first fully developed QFT, belonged to this class of renormalizable theories. There are various technical procedures to renormalize a theory. One way is to cut off the integrals in the calculations at a certain value of the momentum which is large but finite. This cut-off procedure is successful if, after taking the limit  → ∞, the resulting quantities are independent of .\nFeynman's formulation of QED is of special interest from a philosophical point of view. His so-called space-time approach is visualized by the celebrated Feynman diagrams that look like depicting paths of particles. Feynman's method of calculating scattering amplitudes is based on the functional integral formulation of field theory. A set of graphical rules can be derived so that the probability of a specific scattering process can be calculated by drawing a diagram of that process and then using that diagram to write down the precise mathematical expressions for calculating its amplitude in relativistically covariant perturbation theory.\n\nThe diagrams provide an effective way to organize and visualize the various terms in the perturbation series, and they naturally account for the flow of electrons and photons during the scattering process. External lines in the diagrams represent incoming and outgoing particles, internal lines are connected with virtual particles and vertices with interactions. Each of these graphical elements is associated with mathematical expressions that contribute to the amplitude of the respective process. The diagrams are part of Feynman's very efficient and elegant algorithm for computing the probability of scattering processes.\n\nThe idea of particles traveling from one point to another was heuristically useful in constructing the theory. This heuristics, based on Huygens' principle, is useful for concrete calculations and actually give the correct particle propagators as derived more rigorously. Nevertheless, an analysis of the theoretical justification of the space-time approach shows that its success does not imply that particle paths need be taken seriously. General arguments against a particle interpretation of QFT clearly exclude that the diagrams represent actual paths of particles in the interaction area. Feynman himself was not particularly interested in ontological questions.\n\nIn 1933, Enrico Fermi had already established that the creation, annihilation and transmutation of particles in the weak interaction beta decay could best be described in QFT, specifically his quartic fermion interaction. As a result, field theory had become a prospective tool for other particle interactions. In the beginning of the 1950s, QED had become a reliable theory which no longer counted as preliminary. However, it took two decades from writing down the first equations until QFT could be applied successfully to important physical problems in a systematic way.\n\nThe theories explored relied on—indeed, were virtually fully specified by—a rich variety of symmetries pioneered and articulated by Murray Gell-Mann. The new developments made it possible to apply QFT to new particles and new interactions and fully explain their structure.\n\nIn the following decades, QFT was extended to well-describe not only the electromagnetic force but also weak and strong interaction so that new Lagrangians were found which contain new classes of particles or quantum fields. The search still continues for a more comprehensive theory of matter and energy, a \"unified theory of all interactions\". \nThe new focus on symmetry led to the triumph of non-Abelian gauge theories (the development of such theories was pioneered in 1954–60 with the work of Yang and Mills; see Yang–Mills theory) and spontaneous symmetry breaking (by Yoichiro Nambu). Today, there are reliable theories of the strong, weak, and electromagnetic interactions of elementary particles which have an analogous structure to QED: They are the dominant framework of particle physics.\n\nA combined renormalizable theory associated with the gauge group SU(3) × SU(2) × U(1) is dubbed the \"standard model of elementary particle physics\" (even though it is a full theory, and not just a model) and was assembled by Sheldon Glashow, Steven Weinberg and Abdus Salam in 1959–67 (see Electroweak unification), and Frank Wilczek, David Gross and David Politzer in 1973 (see Asymptotic freedom), on the basis of conceptual breakthroughs by Peter Higgs, François Englert, Robert Brout, Martin Veltman, and Gerard 't Hooft.\nAccording to the standard model, there are, on the one hand, six types of leptons (e.g. the electron and its neutrino) and six types of quarks, where the members of both groups are all fermions with spin 1/2. On the other hand, there are spin 1 particles (thus bosons) that mediate the interaction between elementary particles and the fundamental forces, namely the photon for electromagnetic interaction, two W and one Z-boson for weak interaction, and the gluons for strong interaction. The linchpin of the symmetry breaking mechanism of the theory is the spin 0 Higgs boson, discovered 40 years after its prediction.\n\nParallel breakthroughs in the understanding of phase transitions in condensed matter physics led to novel insights based on the renormalization group. They emerged in the work of Leo Kadanoff (1966) and Kenneth Geddes Wilson & Michael Fisher (1972)—extending the work of Ernst Stueckelberg–André Petermann (1953) and Murray Gell-Mann–Francis Low (1954)—which led to the seminal reformulation of quantum field theory by Kenneth Geddes Wilson in 1975.\nThis reformulation provided insights into the evolution of effective field theories with scale, which classified all field theories, renormalizable or not (cf. subsequent section). The remarkable conclusion is that, in general, most observables are \"\"irrelevant\"\", i.e., the macroscopic physics is \"dominated by only a few observables\" in most systems.\n\nDuring the same period, Kadanoff (1969) introduced an operator algebra formalism for the two-dimensional Ising model, a widely studied mathematical model of ferromagnetism in statistical physics. This development suggested that quantum field theory describes its scaling limit. Later, there developed the idea that a finite number of generating operators could represent all the correlation functions of the Ising model.\n\nThe existence of a much stronger symmetry for the scaling limit of two-dimensional critical systems was suggested by Alexander Belavin, Alexander Polyakov and Alexander Zamolodchikov in 1984, which eventually led to the development of conformal field theory, a special case of quantum field theory, which is presently utilized in different areas of particle physics and condensed matter physics.\n\nThe first chapter in is a very good short description of the earlier history of QFT. A detailed account of the historical development of QFT can be found in .\n\nMost theories in standard particle physics are formulated as \"relativistic quantum field theories\", such as QED, QCD, and the Standard Model. QED, the quantum field-theoretic description of the electromagnetic field, approximately reproduces Maxwell's theory of electrodynamics in the low-energy limit, with small non-linear corrections to the Maxwell equations required due to virtual electron–positron pairs.\n\nIn the perturbative approach to quantum field theory, the full field interaction terms are approximated as a perturbative expansion in the number of particles involved. Each term in the expansion can be thought of as forces between particles being mediated by other particles. In QED, the electromagnetic force between two electrons is caused by an exchange of photons. Similarly, intermediate vector bosons mediate the weak force and gluons mediate the strong force in QCD. The notion of a force-mediating particle comes from perturbation theory, and does not make sense in the context of non-perturbative approaches to QFT, such as with bound states.\n\nThere is currently no complete quantum theory of the remaining fundamental force, gravity. Many of the proposed theories to describe gravity as a QFT postulate the existence of a graviton particle that mediates the gravitational force. Presumably, the as yet unknown correct quantum field-theoretic treatment of the gravitational field will behave like Einstein's general theory of relativity in the low-energy limit. Quantum field theory of the fundamental forces itself has been postulated to be the low-energy effective field theory limit of a more fundamental theory such as superstring theory.\n\nQuantum electrodynamics (QED) has one electron field and one photon field; quantum chromodynamics (QCD) has one field for each type of quark; and, in condensed matter, there is an atomic displacement field that gives rise to phonon particles. Edward Witten describes QFT as \"by far\" the most difficult theory in modern physics – \"so difficult that nobody fully believed it for 25 years.\"\n\nOrdinary quantum mechanical systems have a fixed number of particles, with each particle having a finite number of degrees of freedom. In contrast, the excited states of a quantum field can represent any number of particles. This makes quantum field theories especially useful for describing systems where the particle count/number may change over time, a crucial feature of relativistic dynamics. A QFT is thus an organized infinite array of oscillators.\n\nQFT interaction terms are similar in spirit to those between charges with electric and magnetic fields in Maxwell's equations. However, unlike the classical fields of Maxwell's theory, fields in QFT generally exist in quantum superpositions of states and are subject to the laws of quantum mechanics.\n\nBecause the fields are continuous quantities over space, there exist excited states with arbitrarily large numbers of particles in them, providing QFT systems with effectively an infinite number of degrees of freedom. Infinite degrees of freedom can easily lead to divergences of calculated quantities (e.g., the quantities become infinite). Techniques such as renormalization of QFT parameters or discretization of spacetime, as in lattice QCD, are often used to avoid such infinities so as to yield physically plausible results.\n\nThe gravitational field and the electromagnetic field are the only two fundamental fields in nature that have infinite range and a corresponding classical low-energy limit, which greatly diminishes and hides their \"particle-like\" excitations. Albert Einstein in 1905, attributed \"particle-like\" and discrete exchanges of momenta and energy, characteristic of \"field quanta\", to the electromagnetic field. Originally, his principal motivation was to explain the thermodynamics of radiation. Although the photoelectric effect and Compton scattering strongly suggest the existence of the photon, it might alternatively be explained by a mere quantization of emission; more definitive evidence of the quantum nature of radiation is now taken up into modern quantum optics as in the antibunching effect.\n\nA classical field is a function defined over some region of space and time. Two physical phenomena which are described by classical fields are Newtonian gravitation, described by Newtonian gravitational field g(x, \"t\"), and classical electromagnetism, described by the electric and magnetic fields E(x, \"t\") and B(x, \"t\"). Because such fields can in principle take on distinct values at each point in space, they are said to have infinite degrees of freedom.\n\nClassical field theory does not, however, account for the quantum-mechanical aspects of such physical phenomena. For instance, it is known from quantum mechanics that certain aspects of electromagnetism involve discrete particles—photons—rather than continuous fields. The business of \"quantum\" field theory is to write down a field that is, like a classical field, a function defined over space and time, but which also accommodates the observations of quantum mechanics. This is a \"quantum field\".\n\nTo write down such a quantum field, one promotes the infinity of classical oscillators representing the modes of the classical fields to quantum harmonic oscillators. They thus become operator-valued functions (actually, distributions). (In its most general formulation, quantum mechanics is a theory of abstract operators (observables) acting on an abstract state space (Hilbert space), where the observables represent physically observable quantities and the state space represents the possible states of the system under study. For instance, the fundamental observables associated with the motion of a single quantum mechanical particle are the position and momentum operators formula_1 and formula_2. Field theory, by sharp contrast, treats \"x\" as a label, an index of the field rather than as an operator.)\n\nThere are two common ways of handling a quantum field: canonical quantization and the path integral formalism. The latter of these is pursued in this article.\n\nQuantum field theory relies on the Lagrangian formalism from classical field theory. This formalism is analogous to the Lagrangian formalism used in classical mechanics to solve for the motion of a particle under the influence of a field. In classical field theory, one writes down a Lagrangian density, formula_3, involving a field, φ(x,\"t\"), and possibly its first derivatives (∂φ/∂\"t\" and ∇φ), and then applies a field-theoretic form of the Euler–Lagrange equation. Writing coordinates (\"t\", x) = (\"x\", \"x\", \"x\", \"x\") = \"x\", this form of the Euler–Lagrange equation is\nwhere a sum over μ is performed according to the rules of Einstein notation.\n\nBy solving this equation, one arrives at the \"equations of motion\" of the field. For example, if one begins with the Lagrangian density\nand then applies the Euler–Lagrange equation, one obtains the equation of motion\nThis equation is Newton's law of universal gravitation, expressed in differential form in terms of the gravitational potential φ(\"t\", x) and the mass density ρ(\"t\", x). Despite the nomenclature, the \"field\" under study is the gravitational potential, φ, rather than the gravitational field, g. Similarly, when classical field theory is used to study electromagnetism, the \"field\" of interest is the electromagnetic four-potential (\"V\"/\"c\", A), rather than the electric and magnetic fields E and B.\n\nQuantum field theory uses this same Lagrangian procedure to determine the equations of motion for quantum fields. These equations of motion are then supplemented by commutation relations derived from the canonical quantization procedure described below, thereby incorporating quantum mechanical effects into the behavior of the field.\n\nIn non-relativistic quantum mechanics, a particle (such as an electron or proton) is described by a complex wavefunction, , whose time-evolution is governed by the Schrödinger equation:\n\nThere are several shortcomings to the above description of quantum mechanics, which are addressed by quantum field theory. First, it is unclear how to extend quantum mechanics to include the effects of special relativity. Attempted replacements for the Schrödinger equation, such as the Klein–Gordon equation or the Dirac equation, have many unsatisfactory qualities; for instance, they possess energy eigenvalues that extend to –∞, so that there seems to be no easy definition of a ground state. It turns out that such inconsistencies arise from relativistic wavefunctions not having a well-defined probabilistic interpretation in position space, as probability conservation is not a relativistically covariant concept. The second shortcoming, related to the first, is that in quantum mechanics there is no mechanism to describe particle creation and annihilation; this is crucial for describing phenomena such as pair production, which result from the conversion between mass and energy according to the relativistic relation \"E\" = \"mc\".\n\nIn this section, we will describe a method for constructing a quantum field theory called second quantization. This basically involves choosing a way to index the quantum mechanical degrees of freedom in the space of multiple identical-particle states. It is based on the Hamiltonian formulation of quantum mechanics.\n\nSeveral other approaches exist, such as the Feynman path integral, which uses a Lagrangian formulation. For an overview of some of these approaches, see the article on quantization.\n\nFor simplicity, we will first discuss second quantization for bosons, which form perfectly symmetric quantum states. Let us denote the mutually orthogonal single-particle states which are possible in the system by formula_8 and so on. For example, the 3-particle state with one particle in state formula_9 and two in state formula_10 is\n\nThe first step in second quantization is to express such quantum states in terms of occupation numbers, by listing the number of particles occupying each of the single-particle states formula_12 etc. This is simply another way of labelling the states. For instance, the above 3-particle state is denoted as\n\nAn \"N\"-particle state belongs to a space of states describing systems of \"N\" particles. The next step is to combine the individual \"N\"-particle state spaces into an extended state space, known as Fock space, which can describe systems of any number of particles. This is composed of the state space of a system with no particles (the so-called vacuum state, written as formula_14), plus the state space of a 1-particle system, plus the state space of a 2-particle system, and so forth. States describing a definite number of particles are known as Fock states: a general element of Fock space will be a linear combination of Fock states. There is a one-to-one correspondence between the occupation number representation and valid boson states in the Fock space.\n\nAt this point, the quantum mechanical system has become a quantum field in the sense we described above. The field's elementary degrees of freedom are the occupation numbers, and each occupation number is indexed by a number formula_15 indicating which of the single-particle states formula_16 it refers to:\n\nThe properties of this quantum field can be explored by defining creation and annihilation operators, which add and subtract particles. They are analogous to ladder operators in the quantum harmonic oscillator problem, which added and subtracted energy quanta. However, these operators literally create and annihilate particles of a given quantum state. The bosonic annihilation operator formula_18 and creation operator formula_19 are easily defined in the occupation number representation as having the following effects:\n\nIt can be shown that these are operators in the usual quantum mechanical sense, i.e. linear operators acting on the Fock space. Furthermore, they are indeed Hermitian conjugates, which justifies the way we have written them. They can be shown to obey the commutation relation\n\nwhere formula_23 stands for the Kronecker delta. These are precisely the relations obeyed by the ladder operators for an infinite set of independent quantum harmonic oscillators, one for each single-particle state. Adding or removing bosons from each state is, therefore, analogous to exciting or de-exciting a quantum of energy in a harmonic oscillator.\n\nApplying an annihilation operator formula_24 followed by its corresponding creation operator formula_25 returns the number formula_26 of particles in the \"k\" single-particle eigenstate:\nThe combination of operators formula_28 is known as the number operator for the \"k\" eigenstate.\n\nThe Hamiltonian operator of the quantum field (which, through the Schrödinger equation, determines its dynamics) can be written in terms of creation and annihilation operators. For instance, for a field of free (non-interacting) bosons, the total energy of the field is found by summing the energies of the bosons in each energy eigenstate. If the \"k\" single-particle energy eigenstate has energy formula_29 and there are formula_26 bosons in this state, then the total energy of these bosons is formula_31. The energy in the \"entire\" field is then a sum over formula_32:\nThis can be turned into the Hamiltonian operator of the field by replacing formula_26 with the corresponding number operator, formula_28. This yields\n\nIt turns out that a different definition of creation and annihilation must be used for describing fermions. According to the Pauli exclusion principle, fermions cannot share quantum states, so their occupation numbers \"N\" can only take on the value 0 or 1. The fermionic annihilation operators \"c\" and creation operators formula_37 are defined by their actions on a Fock state thus\n\nThese obey an anticommutation relation:\n\nOne may notice from this that applying a fermionic creation operator twice gives zero, so it is impossible for the particles to share single-particle states, in accordance with the exclusion principle.\n\nWe have previously mentioned that there can be more than one way of indexing the degrees of freedom in a quantum field. Second quantization indexes the field by enumerating the single-particle quantum states. However, as we have discussed, it is more natural to think about a \"field\", such as the electromagnetic field, as a set of degrees of freedom indexed by position.\n\nTo this end, we can define \"field operators\" that create or destroy a particle at a particular point in space. In particle physics, these operators turn out to be more convenient to work with, because they make it easier to formulate theories that satisfy the demands of relativity.\n\nSingle-particle states are usually enumerated in terms of their momenta (as in the particle in a box problem.) We can construct field operators by applying the Fourier transform to the creation and annihilation operators for these states. For example, the bosonic field annihilation operator formula_43 is\n\nThe bosonic field operators obey the commutation relation\n\nwhere formula_46 stands for the Dirac delta function. As before, the fermionic relations are the same, with the commutators replaced by anticommutators.\n\nThe field operator is not the same thing as a single-particle wavefunction. The former is an operator acting on the Fock space, and the latter is a quantum-mechanical amplitude for finding a particle in some position. However, they are closely related and are indeed commonly denoted with the same symbol. If we have a Hamiltonian with a space representation, say\n\nwhere the indices \"i\" and \"j\" run over all particles, then the field theory Hamiltonian (in the non-relativistic limit and for negligible self-interactions) is\n\nThis looks remarkably like an expression for the expectation value of the energy, with formula_49 playing the role of the wavefunction. This relationship between the field operators and wave functions makes it very easy to formulate field theories starting from space projected Hamiltonians.\n\nOnce the Hamiltonian operator is obtained as part of the canonical quantization process, the time dependence of the state is described with the Schrödinger equation, just as with other quantum theories. \nAlternatively, the Heisenberg picture can be used where the time dependence is in the operators rather than in the states.\n\nProbability amplitudes of observables in such systems are quite hard to evaluate, an enterprise which has absorbed considerable ingenuity in the last three quarters of a century. In practice, most often, expectation values of operators are computed systematically through \"covariant perturbation theory\", formulated through Feynman diagrams, but path integral computer simulations have also produced important results. Contemporary particle physics relies on extraordinarily accurate predictions of such techniques.\n\nThe \"second quantization\" procedure outlined in the previous section takes a set of single-particle quantum states as a starting point. Sometimes, it is impossible to define such single-particle states, and one must proceed directly to quantum field theory. For example, a quantum theory of the electromagnetic field \"must\" be a quantum field theory, because it is impossible (for various reasons) to define a wavefunction for a single photon. In such situations, the quantum field theory can be constructed by examining the mechanical properties of the classical field and guessing the corresponding quantum theory. For free (non-interacting) quantum fields, the quantum field theories obtained in this way have the same properties as those obtained using second quantization, such as well-defined creation and annihilation operators obeying commutation or anticommutation relations.\n\nQuantum field theory thus provides a unified framework for describing \"field-like\" objects (such as the electromagnetic field, whose excitations are photons) and \"particle-like\" objects (such as electrons, which are treated as excitations of an underlying electron field), so long as one can treat interactions as \"perturbations\" of free fields.\n\nThe second quantization procedure relies crucially on the particles being identical. We would not have been able to construct a quantum field theory from a distinguishable many-particle system, because there would have been no way of separating and indexing the degrees of freedom.\n\nMany physicists prefer to take the converse interpretation, which is that \"quantum field theory explains what identical particles are\". In ordinary quantum mechanics, there is not much theoretical motivation for using symmetric (bosonic) or antisymmetric (fermionic) states, and the need for such states is simply regarded as an empirical fact. From the point of view of quantum field theory, particles are identical if and only if they are excitations of the same underlying quantum field. Thus, the question \"why are all electrons identical?\" arises from mistakenly regarding individual electrons as fundamental objects, when in fact it is only the electron field that is fundamental.\n\nDuring second quantization, we started with a Hamiltonian and state space describing a fixed number of particles (\"N\"), and ended with a Hamiltonian and state space for an arbitrary number of particles. Of course, in many common situations \"N\" is an important and perfectly well-defined quantity, e.g. if we are describing a gas of atoms sealed in a box. From the point of view of quantum field theory, such situations are described by quantum states that are eigenstates of the number operator formula_50, which measures the total number of particles present. As with any quantum mechanical observable, formula_50 is conserved if it commutes with the Hamiltonian. In that case, the quantum state is trapped in the \"N\"-particle subspace of the total Fock space, and the situation could equally well be described by ordinary \"N\"-particle quantum mechanics. (Strictly speaking, this is only true in the noninteracting case or in the low energy density limit of renormalized quantum field theories)\n\nFor example, we can see that the free boson Hamiltonian described above conserves particle number. Whenever the Hamiltonian operates on a state, each particle destroyed by an annihilation operator formula_24 is immediately put back by the creation operator formula_25.\n\nOn the other hand, it is possible, and indeed common, to encounter quantum states that are \"not\" eigenstates of formula_50, which do not have well-defined particle numbers. Such states are difficult or impossible to handle using ordinary quantum mechanics, but they can be easily described in quantum field theory as quantum superpositions of states having different values of \"N\". For example, suppose we have a bosonic field whose particles can be created or destroyed by interactions with a fermionic field. The Hamiltonian of the combined system would be given by the Hamiltonians of the free boson and free fermion fields, plus a \"potential energy\" term such as\n\nwhere formula_25 and formula_24 denotes the bosonic creation and annihilation operators, formula_58 and formula_59 denotes the fermionic creation and annihilation operators, and formula_60 is a parameter that describes the strength of the interaction. This \"interaction term\" describes processes in which a fermion in state \"k\" either absorbs or emits a boson, thereby being kicked into a different eigenstate formula_61. (In fact, this type of Hamiltonian is used to describe the interaction between conduction electrons and phonons in metals. The interaction between electrons and photons is treated in a similar way, but is a little more complicated because the role of spin must be taken into account.) One thing to notice here is that even if we start out with a fixed number of bosons, we will typically end up with a superposition of states with different numbers of bosons at later times. The number of fermions, however, is conserved in this case.\n\nIn condensed matter physics, states with ill-defined particle numbers are particularly important for describing the various superfluids. Many of the defining characteristics of a superfluid arise from the notion that its quantum state is a superposition of states with different particle numbers. In addition, the concept of a coherent state (used to model the laser and the BCS ground state) refers to a state with an ill-defined particle number but a well-defined phase.\n\nBeyond the most general features of quantum field theories, special aspects such as renormalizability, gauge symmetry, and supersymmetry are outlined below.\n\nEarly in the history of quantum field theory, as detailed above, it was found that many seemingly innocuous calculations, such as the perturbative shift in the energy of an electron due to the presence of the electromagnetic field, yield infinite results. The reason is that the perturbation theory for the shift in an energy involves a sum over \"all other energy levels, and there are infinitely many levels\" at short distances, so that each gives a finite contribution which results in a divergent series.\n\nMany of these problems are related to failures in classical electrodynamics that were identified but unsolved in the 19th century, and they basically stem from the fact that many of the supposedly \"intrinsic\" properties of an electron are tied to the electromagnetic field that it carries around with it. The energy carried by a single electron—its self-energy—is not simply the bare value, but also includes the energy contained in its electromagnetic field, its attendant cloud of photons. The energy in a field of a spherical source diverges in both classical and quantum mechanics, but as discovered by Weisskopf with help from Furry, in quantum mechanics \"the divergence is much milder\", going \"only as the logarithm\" of the radius of the sphere.\n\nThe solution to the problem, presciently suggested by Stueckelberg, independently by Bethe after the crucial experiment by Lamb and Retherford (the Lamb–Retherford experiment), implemented at one loop by Schwinger, and systematically extended to all loops by Feynman and Dyson, with converging work by Tomonaga in isolated postwar Japan, comes from recognizing that all the infinities in the interactions of photons and electrons can be isolated into redefining a finite number of quantities in the equations by replacing them with the observed values: specifically the electron's mass and charge: this is called renormalization. The technique of renormalization recognizes that the problem is tractable and essentially purely mathematical; and that, physically, extremely short distances are at fault.\n\nIn order to define a theory on a continuum, one may first place a cutoff on the fields, by postulating that quanta cannot have energies above some extremely high value. This has the effect of replacing continuous space by a structure where very short wavelengths do not exist, as on a lattice. Lattices break rotational symmetry, and one of the crucial contributions made by Feynman, Pauli and Villars, and modernized by 't Hooft and Veltman, is a symmetry-preserving cutoff for perturbation theory (this process is called regularization). There is no known symmetrical cutoff outside of perturbation theory, so for rigorous or numerical work people often use an actual lattice.\n\nOn a lattice, every quantity is finite but depends on the spacing. When taking the limit to zero spacing, one makes sure that the physically observable quantities like the observed electron mass stay fixed, which means that the constants in the Lagrangian defining the theory depend on the spacing. By allowing the constants to vary with the lattice spacing, all the results at long distances become insensitive to the lattice, defining a continuum limit.\n\nThe renormalization procedure only works for a certain limited class of quantum field theories, called \"renormalizable quantum field theories\". A theory is \"perturbatively renormalizable\" when the constants in the Lagrangian only diverge at worst as \"logarithms\" of the lattice spacing for very short spacings. The continuum limit is then well defined in perturbation theory, and even if it is not fully well defined non-perturbatively, the problems only show up at distance scales that are exponentially small in the inverse coupling for weak couplings. The Standard Model of particle physics is perturbatively renormalizable, and so are its component theories (quantum electrodynamics/electroweak theory and quantum chromodynamics). Of the three components, quantum electrodynamics is believed to not have a continuum limit by itself, while the asymptotically free \"SU(2)\" and \"SU(3)\" weak and strong color interactions are nonperturbatively well defined.\n\nThe renormalization group as developed along Wilson's breakthrough insights relates effective field theories at a given scale to such at contiguous scales. It thus describes how renormalizable theories emerge as the long distance low-energy effective field theory for any given high-energy theory. As a consequence, renormalizable theories are insensitive to the precise nature of the underlying high-energy short-distance phenomena (the macroscopic physics is dominated by only a few \"\"relevant\" observables\"). This is a blessing in practical terms, because it allows physicists to formulate low energy theories without detailed knowledge of high-energy phenomena. It is also a curse, because once a renormalizable theory such as the standard model is found to work, it provides very few clues to higher-energy processes.\n\nThe only way high-energy processes can be seen in the standard model is when they allow otherwise forbidden events, or else if they reveal predicted compelling quantitative relations among the coupling constants of the theories or models.\n\nOn account of renormalization, the couplings of QFT vary with scale, thereby confining quarks into hadrons, allowing the study of weakly-coupled quarks inside hadrons, and enabling speculation on ultra-high energy behavior.\n\nA gauge theory is a theory that admits a symmetry with a local parameter. For example, in every quantum theory, the global phase of the wave function is arbitrary and does not represent something physical. Consequently, the theory is invariant under a global change of phases (adding a constant to the phase of all wave functions, everywhere); this is a global symmetry. In quantum electrodynamics, the theory is also invariant under a \"local\" change of phase, that is – one may shift the phase of all wave functions so that the shift may be different at every point in space-time. This is a \"local\" symmetry. However, in order for a well-defined derivative operator to exist, one must introduce a new field, the gauge field, which also transforms in order for the local change of variables (the phase in our example) not to affect the derivative. In quantum electrodynamics, this gauge field is the electromagnetic field. The change of local gauge of variables is termed gauge transformation.\n\nBy Noether's theorem, for every such symmetry there exists an associated conserved current. The aforementioned symmetry of the wavefunction under global phase changes implies the conservation of electric charge. Since the excitations of fields represent particles, the particle associated with excitations of the gauge field is the gauge boson, e.g., the photon in the case of quantum electrodynamics.\n\nThe degrees of freedom in quantum field theory are local fluctuations of the fields. The existence of a gauge symmetry reduces the number of degrees of freedom, simply because some fluctuations of the fields can be transformed to zero by gauge transformations, so they are equivalent to having no fluctuations at all, and they, therefore, have no physical meaning. Such fluctuations are usually called \"non-physical degrees of freedom\" or \"gauge artifacts\"; usually, some of them have a negative norm, making them inadequate for a consistent theory. Therefore, if a classical field theory has a gauge symmetry, then its quantized version (the corresponding quantum field theory) will have this symmetry as well. In other words, a gauge symmetry cannot have a quantum anomaly.\n\nIn general, the gauge transformations of a theory consist of several different transformations, which may not be commutative. These transformations are combine into the framework of a gauge group; infinitesimal gauge transformations are the gauge group generators. Thus, the number of gauge bosons is the group dimension (i.e., the number of generators forming the basis of the corresponding Lie algebra).\n\nAll the known fundamental interactions in nature are described by gauge theories (possibly barring the Higgs multiplet couplings, if considered in isolation). These are:\n\nSupersymmetry assumes that every fundamental fermion has a superpartner that is a boson and vice versa. Its gauge theory, Supergravity, is an extension of general relativity. Supersymmetry is a key ingredient for the consistency of string theory.\n\nIt was utilized in order to solve the so-called Hierarchy Problem of the standard model, that is, to explain why particles not protected by any symmetry (like the Higgs boson) do not receive radiative corrections to their mass, driving it to the larger scales such as that of GUTs, or the Planck mass of gravity. The way supersymmetry protects scale hierarchies is the following: since for every particle there is a superpartner with the same mass but different statistics, any loop in a radiative correction is cancelled by the loop corresponding to its superpartner, rendering the theory more UV finite.\n\nSince, however, no super partners have been observed, if supersymmetry existed it should be broken severely (through a so-called soft term, which breaks supersymmetry without ruining its helpful features). The simplest models of this breaking require that the energy of the superpartners not be too high; in these cases, supersymmetry could be observed by experiments at the Large Hadron Collider. However, to date, after the observation of the Higgs boson there, no such superparticles have been discovered.\n\nThe preceding description of quantum field theory follows the spirit in which most physicists approach the subject. However, it is not mathematically rigorous. Over the past several decades, there have been many attempts to put quantum field theory on a firm mathematical footing by formulating a set of axioms for it. Finding proper axioms for quantum field theory is still an open and difficult problem in mathematics. One of the Millennium Prize Problems—proving the existence of a mass gap in Yang–Mills theory—is linked to this issue. These attempts fall into two broad classes.\n\nThe first class of axioms, first proposed during the 1950s, include the Wightman, Osterwalder–Schrader, and Haag–Kastler systems. They attempted to formalize the physicists' notion of an \"operator-valued field\" within the context of functional analysis and enjoyed limited success. It was possible to prove that any quantum field theory satisfying these axioms satisfied certain general theorems, such as the spin-statistics theorem and the CPT theorem. Unfortunately, it proved extraordinarily difficult to show that any realistic field theory, including the Standard Model, satisfied these axioms. Most of the theories that could be treated with these analytic axioms were physically trivial, being restricted to low-dimensions and lacking interesting dynamics. The construction of theories satisfying one of these sets of axioms falls in the field of constructive quantum field theory. Important work was done in this area in the 1970s by Segal, Glimm, Jaffe and others.\n\nDuring the 1980s, the second set of axioms based on topological ideas was proposed. Before 1980 all states of matter could be classified by geometry and the principle of broken symmetry. For example Einstein's theory of general relativity is based on the geometrical curvature of space and time, while crystals, magnets and superconductors can all be classified by the symmetries they break. In 1980 the quantum Hall effect provided the first example of a state of matter that has no spontaneous broken symmetry; its characterization is dependant on its topology and not on its geometry (See geometry v. topology). The quantum Hall effect can be described by extending quantum field theory into an effective topological quantum field theory based on the Chern–Simons theory. This line of investigation, which extends quantum field theories to topological quantum field theories, is associated most closely with Michael Atiyah and Graeme Segal, and was notably expanded upon by Edward Witten, Richard Borcherds, and Maxim Kontsevich. The main impact of topological quantum field theory has been in condensed matter physics where physicists have observed exotic quasiparticles such as magnetic monopoles and Majorana fermions.\nTopological field considerations could have radical applications in a new form of electronics called spintronics and topological quantum computers. The Standard Model allows for topological terms but is generally not formulated as a topological quantum field theory. Topological quantum field theory has also had broad impact in mathematics, with important applications in representation theory, algebraic topology, and differential geometry.\n\nFrom a mathematically rigorous perspective, there exists no interaction picture in a Lorentz-covariant quantum field theory. This implies that the perturbative approach of Feynman diagrams in QFT is not strictly justified, despite producing vastly precise predictions validated by experiment. This is called Haag's theorem, but most particle physicists relying on QFT largely shrug it off, as not really limiting the power of the theory.\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\nArticles\n\n"}
{"id": "25268", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25268", "title": "Quantum electrodynamics", "text": "Quantum electrodynamics\n\nIn particle physics, quantum electrodynamics (QED) is the relativistic quantum field theory of electrodynamics. In essence, it describes how light and matter interact and is the first theory where full agreement between quantum mechanics and special relativity is achieved. QED mathematically describes all phenomena involving electrically charged particles interacting by means of exchange of photons and represents the quantum counterpart of classical electromagnetism giving a complete account of matter and light interaction.\n\nIn technical terms, QED can be described as a perturbation theory of the electromagnetic quantum vacuum. Richard Feynman called it \"the jewel of physics\" for its extremely accurate predictions of quantities like the anomalous magnetic moment of the electron and the Lamb shift of the energy levels of hydrogen.\n\nThe first formulation of a quantum theory describing radiation and matter interaction is attributed to British scientist Paul Dirac, who (during the 1920s) was able to compute the coefficient of spontaneous emission of an atom.\n\nDirac described the quantization of the electromagnetic field as an ensemble of harmonic oscillators with the introduction of the concept of creation and annihilation operators of particles. In the following years, with contributions from Wolfgang Pauli, Eugene Wigner, Pascual Jordan, Werner Heisenberg and an elegant formulation of quantum electrodynamics due to Enrico Fermi, physicists came to believe that, in principle, it would be possible to perform any computation for any physical process involving photons and charged particles. However, further studies by Felix Bloch with Arnold Nordsieck, and Victor Weisskopf, in 1937 and 1939, revealed that such computations were reliable only at a first order of perturbation theory, a problem already pointed out by Robert Oppenheimer. At higher orders in the series infinities emerged, making such computations meaningless and casting serious doubts on the internal consistency of the theory itself. With no solution for this problem known at the time, it appeared that a fundamental incompatibility existed between special relativity and quantum mechanics.\nDifficulties with the theory increased through the end of the 1940s. Improvements in microwave technology made it possible to take more precise measurements of the shift of the levels of a hydrogen atom, now known as the Lamb shift and magnetic moment of the electron. These experiments exposed discrepancies which the theory was unable to explain.\n\nA first indication of a possible way out was given by Hans Bethe in 1947, after attending the Shelter Island Conference. While he was traveling by train from the conference to Schenectady he made the first non-relativistic computation of the shift of the lines of the hydrogen atom as measured by Lamb and Retherford. Despite the limitations of the computation, agreement was excellent. The idea was simply to attach infinities to corrections of mass and charge that were actually fixed to a finite value by experiments. In this way, the infinities get absorbed in those constants and yield a finite result in good agreement with experiments. This procedure was named renormalization.\n\nBased on Bethe's intuition and fundamental papers on the subject by Shin'ichirō Tomonaga, Julian Schwinger, Richard Feynman and Freeman Dyson, it was finally possible to get fully covariant formulations that were finite at any order in a perturbation series of quantum electrodynamics. Shin'ichirō Tomonaga, Julian Schwinger and Richard Feynman were jointly awarded with a Nobel prize in physics in 1965 for their work in this area. Their contributions, and those of Freeman Dyson, were about covariant and gauge invariant formulations of quantum electrodynamics that allow computations of observables at any order of perturbation theory. Feynman's mathematical technique, based on his diagrams, initially seemed very different from the field-theoretic, operator-based approach of Schwinger and Tomonaga, but Freeman Dyson later showed that the two approaches were equivalent. Renormalization, the need to attach a physical meaning at certain divergences appearing in the theory through integrals, has subsequently become one of the fundamental aspects of quantum field theory and has come to be seen as a criterion for a theory's general acceptability. Even though renormalization works very well in practice, Feynman was never entirely comfortable with its mathematical validity, even referring to renormalization as a \"shell game\" and \"hocus pocus\".\n\nQED has served as the model and template for all subsequent quantum field theories. One such subsequent theory is quantum chromodynamics, which began in the early 1960s and attained its present form in the 1970s work by H. David Politzer, Sidney Coleman, David Gross and Frank Wilczek. Building on the pioneering work of Schwinger, Gerald Guralnik, Dick Hagen, and Tom Kibble, Peter Higgs, Jeffrey Goldstone, and others, Sheldon Glashow, Steven Weinberg and Abdus Salam independently showed how the weak nuclear force and quantum electrodynamics could be merged into a single electroweak force.\n\nNear the end of his life, Richard P. Feynman gave a series of lectures on QED intended for the lay public. These lectures were transcribed and published as Feynman (1985), \"QED: The strange theory of light and matter\", a classic non-mathematical exposition of QED from the point of view articulated below.\n\nThe key components of Feynman's presentation of QED are three basic actions.\n\nThese actions are represented in a form of visual shorthand by the three basic elements of Feynman diagrams: a wavy line for the photon, a straight line for the electron and a junction of two straight lines and a wavy one for a vertex representing emission or absorption of a photon by an electron. These can all be seen in the adjacent diagram.\n\nIt is important not to over-interpret these diagrams. Nothing is implied about \"how\" a particle gets from one point to another. The diagrams do \"not\" imply that the particles are moving in straight or curved lines. They do \"not\" imply that the particles are moving with constant speeds. The fact that the photon is often represented, by convention, by a wavy line and not a straight one does \"not\" imply that it is thought that it is more wavelike than is an electron. The images are just symbols to represent the actions above: photons and electrons do, somehow, move from point to point and electrons, somehow, emit and absorb photons. The theory does not explain how these things happen, but it does tell us the probabilities of these things happening in various situations.\n\nAs well as the visual shorthand for the actions Feynman introduces another kind of shorthand for the numerical quantities called probability amplitudes. The probability is the square of the absolute value of total probability amplitude, formula_1. If a photon moves from one place and time—in shorthand, formula_2—to another place and time—in shorthand, formula_3—the associated quantity is written in Feynman's shorthand as formula_4. The similar quantity for an electron moving from formula_5 to formula_6 is written formula_7. The quantity which tells us about the probability amplitude for the emission or absorption of a photon he calls 'j'. This is related to, but not the same as, the measured electron charge 'e'.\n\nQED is based on the assumption that complex interactions of many electrons and photons can be represented by fitting together a suitable collection of the above three building blocks, and then using the probability amplitudes to calculate the probability of any such complex interaction. It turns out that the basic idea of QED can be communicated while making the assumption that the square of the total of the probability amplitudes mentioned above (P(A to B), E(C to D) and 'j') acts just like our everyday probability. (A simplification made in Feynman's book.) Later on, this will be corrected to include specifically quantum-style mathematics, following Feynman.\n\nThe basic rules of probability amplitudes that will be used are that a) if an event can happen in a variety of different ways then its probability amplitude is the sum of the probability amplitudes of the possible ways and b) if a process involves a number of independent sub-processes then its probability amplitude is the product of the component probability amplitudes.\n\nSuppose we start with one electron at a certain place and time (this place and time being given the arbitrary label A) and a photon at another place and time (given the label B). A typical question from a physical standpoint is: 'What is the probability of finding an electron at C (another place and a later time) and a photon at D (yet another place and time)?'. The simplest process to achieve this end is for the electron to move from A to C (an elementary action) and for the photon to move from B to D (another elementary action). From a knowledge of the probability amplitudes of each of these sub-processes – E(A to C) and P(B to D) – then we would expect to calculate the probability amplitude of both happening together by multiplying them, using rule b) above. This gives a simple estimated overall probability amplitude, which is squared to give an estimated probability. But there are other ways in which the end result could come about. The electron might move to a place and time E where it absorbs the photon; then move on before emitting another photon at F; then move on to C where it is detected, while the new photon moves on to D. The probability of this complex process can again be calculated by knowing the probability amplitudes of each of the individual actions: three electron actions, two photon actions and two vertexes – one emission and one absorption. We would expect to find the total probability amplitude by multiplying the probability amplitudes of each of the actions, for any chosen positions of E and F. We then, using rule a) above, have to add up all these probability amplitudes for all the alternatives for E and F. (This is not elementary in practice, and involves integration.) But there is another possibility, which is that the electron first moves to G where it emits a photon which goes on to D, while the electron moves on to H, where it absorbs the first photon, before moving on to C. Again we can calculate the probability amplitude of these possibilities (for all points G and H). We then have a better estimation for the total probability amplitude by adding the probability amplitudes of these two possibilities to our original simple estimate. Incidentally the name given to this process of a photon interacting with an electron in this way is Compton scattering.\n\nThere are an \"infinite number\" of other intermediate processes in which more and more photons are absorbed and/or emitted. For each of these possibilities there is a Feynman diagram describing it. This implies a complex computation for the resulting probability amplitudes, but provided it is the case that the more complicated the diagram the less it contributes to the result, it is only a matter of time and effort to find as accurate an answer as one wants to the original question. This is the basic approach of QED. To calculate the probability of \"any\" interactive process between electrons and photons it is a matter of first noting, with Feynman diagrams, all the possible ways in which the process can be constructed from the three basic elements. Each diagram involves some calculation involving definite rules to find the associated probability amplitude.\n\nThat basic scaffolding remains when one moves to a quantum description but some conceptual changes are needed. One is that whereas we might expect in our everyday life that there would be some constraints on the points to which a particle can move, that is \"not\" true in full quantum electrodynamics. There is a possibility of an electron at A, or a photon at B, moving as a basic action to \"any other place and time in the universe\". That includes places that could only be reached at speeds greater than that of light and also \"earlier times\". (An electron moving backwards in time can be viewed as a positron moving forward in time.)\n\nQuantum mechanics introduces an important change in the way probabilities are computed. Probabilities are still represented by the usual real numbers we use for probabilities in our everyday world, but probabilities are computed as the square of probability amplitudes. Probability amplitudes are complex numbers.\n\nFeynman avoids exposing the reader to the mathematics of complex numbers by using a simple but accurate representation of them as arrows on a piece of paper or screen. (These must not be confused with the arrows of Feynman diagrams which are actually simplified representations in two dimensions of a relationship between points in three dimensions of space and one of time.) The amplitude arrows are fundamental to the description of the world given by quantum theory. No satisfactory reason has been given for \"why\" they are needed. But pragmatically we have to accept that they are an essential part of our description of all quantum phenomena. They are related to our everyday ideas of probability by the simple rule that the probability of an event is the square of the length of the corresponding amplitude arrow. So, for a given process, if two probability amplitudes, v and w, are involved, the probability of the process will be given either by\n\nor\n\nThe rules as regards adding or multiplying, however, are the same as above. But where you would expect to add or multiply probabilities, instead you add or multiply probability amplitudes that now are complex numbers.\n\nAddition and multiplication are familiar operations in the theory of complex numbers and are given in the figures. The sum is found as follows. Let the start of the second arrow be at the end of the first. The sum is then a third arrow that goes directly from the start of the first to the end of the second. The product of two arrows is an arrow whose length is the product of the two lengths. The direction of the product is found by adding the angles that each of the two have been turned through relative to a reference direction: that gives the angle that the product is turned relative to the reference direction.\n\nThat change, from probabilities to probability amplitudes, complicates the mathematics without changing the basic approach. But that change is still not quite enough because it fails to take into account the fact that both photons and electrons can be polarized, which is to say that their orientations in space and time have to be taken into account. Therefore, P(A to B) actually consists of 16 complex numbers, or probability amplitude arrows. There are also some minor changes to do with the quantity \"j\", which may have to be rotated by a multiple of 90° for some polarizations, which is only of interest for the detailed bookkeeping.\n\nAssociated with the fact that the electron can be polarized is another small necessary detail which is connected with the fact that an electron is a fermion and obeys Fermi–Dirac statistics. The basic rule is that if we have the probability amplitude for a given complex process involving more than one electron, then when we include (as we always must) the complementary Feynman diagram in which we just exchange two electron events, the resulting amplitude is the reverse – the negative – of the first. The simplest case would be two electrons starting at A and B ending at C and D. The amplitude would be calculated as the \"difference\", , where we would expect, from our everyday idea of probabilities, that it would be a sum.\n\nFinally, one has to compute P (A to B) and E (C to D) corresponding to the probability amplitudes for the photon and the electron respectively. These are essentially the solutions of the Dirac equation which describes the behavior of the electron's probability amplitude and the Klein–Gordon equation which describes the behavior of the photon's probability amplitude. These are called Feynman propagators. The translation to a notation commonly used in the standard literature is as follows:\n\nwhere a shorthand symbol such as formula_11 stands for the four real numbers which give the time and position in three dimensions of the point labeled A.\n\nA problem arose historically which held up progress for twenty years: although we start with the assumption of three basic \"simple\" actions, the rules of the game say that if we want to calculate the probability amplitude for an electron to get from A to B we must take into account all the possible ways: all possible Feynman diagrams with those end points. Thus there will be a way in which the electron travels to C, emits a photon there and then absorbs it again at D before moving on to B. Or it could do this kind of thing twice, or more. In short we have a fractal-like situation in which if we look closely at a line it breaks up into a collection of \"simple\" lines, each of which, if looked at closely, are in turn composed of \"simple\" lines, and so on \"ad infinitum\". This is a very difficult situation to handle. If adding that detail only altered things slightly then it would not have been too bad, but disaster struck when it was found that the simple correction mentioned above led to \"infinite\" probability amplitudes. In time this problem was \"fixed\" by the technique of renormalization. However, Feynman himself remained unhappy about it, calling it a \"dippy process\".\n\nWithin the above framework physicists were then able to calculate to a high degree of accuracy some of the properties of electrons, such as the anomalous magnetic dipole moment. However, as Feynman points out, it fails totally to explain why particles such as the electron have the masses they do. \"There is no theory that adequately explains these numbers. We use the numbers in all our theories, but we don't understand them – what they are, or where they come from. I believe that from a fundamental point of view, this is a very interesting and serious problem.\"\n\nMathematically, QED is an abelian gauge theory with the symmetry group U(1). The gauge field, which mediates the interaction between the charged spin-1/2 fields, is the electromagnetic field.\nThe QED Lagrangian for a spin-1/2 field interacting with the electromagnetic field is given in natural units by the real part of\nwhere\n\nSubstituting the definition of \"D\" into the Lagrangian gives\n\nFrom this Lagrangian, the equations of motion for the \"ψ\" and \"A\" fields can be obtained.\n\nUsing the field-theoretic Euler–Lagrange equation for \"ψ\",\n\nthe derivatives of the Lagrangian with respect to \"ψ\" are\n\nand inserting these into () results in\n\nwith Hermitian conjugate\n\nBringing the middle term to the right-hand side obtains\n\nThe left-hand side is like the original Dirac equation, and the right-hand side is the interaction with the electromagnetic field.\n\nUsing the EL equations for the \"A\" field,\n\nthe derivatives this time are\n\nand substituting back into () leads to\n\nNow, if we impose the Lorenz gauge condition\n\nthe equations reduce to\n\nwhich is a wave equation for the four potential, the QED version of the classical Maxwell equations in the Lorenz gauge. (The square represents the D'Alembert operator, formula_28.)\n\nThis theory can be straightforwardly quantized by treating bosonic and fermionic sectors as free. This permits us to build a set of asymptotic states which can be used to start a computation of the probability amplitudes for different processes. In order to do so, we have to compute an evolution operator that, for a given initial state formula_29, will give a final state formula_30 in such a way to have\n\nThis technique is also known as the S-matrix. The evolution operator is obtained in the interaction picture where time evolution is given by the interaction Hamiltonian, which is the integral over space of the second term in the Lagrangian density given above:\n\nand so, one has\n\nwhere \"T\" is the time ordering operator. This evolution operator only has meaning as a series, and what we get here is a perturbation series with the fine structure constant as the development parameter. This series is called the Dyson series.\n\nDespite the conceptual clarity of this Feynman approach to QED, almost no early textbooks follow him in their presentation. When performing calculations it is much easier to work with the Fourier transforms of the propagators. Experimental tests of quantum electrodynamics are typically scattering experiments. In scattering theory, particles' momenta rather than their positions are considered, and it is convenient to think of particles as being created or annihilated when they interact. Feynman diagrams then \"look\" the same, but the lines have different interpretations. The electron line represents an electron with a given energy and momentum, with a similar interpretation of the photon line. A vertex diagram represents the annihilation of one electron and the creation of another together with the absorption or creation of a photon, each having specified energies and momenta.\n\nUsing Wick theorem on the terms of the Dyson series, all the terms of the S-matrix for quantum electrodynamics can be computed through the technique of Feynman diagrams. In this case rules for drawing are the following\n\nTo these rules we must add a further one for closed loops that implies an integration on momenta formula_34, since these internal (\"virtual\") particles are not constrained to any specific energy–momentum – even that usually required by special relativity (see this article for details).\nFrom them, computations of probability amplitudes are straightforwardly given. An example is Compton scattering, with an electron and a photon undergoing elastic scattering. Feynman diagrams are in this case\n\nand so we are able to get the corresponding amplitude at the first order of a perturbation series for the S-matrix:\n\nfrom which we are able to compute the cross section for this scattering.\n\nHigher order terms can be straightforwardly computed for the evolution operator but these terms display diagrams containing the following simpler ones\n\nthat, being closed loops, imply the presence of diverging integrals having no mathematical meaning. To overcome this difficulty, a technique called renormalization has been devised, producing finite results in very close agreement with experiments. It is important to note that a criterion for theory being meaningful after renormalization is that the number of diverging diagrams is finite. In this case the theory is said to be renormalizable. The reason for this is that to get observables renormalized one needs a finite number of constants to maintain the predictive value of the theory untouched. This is exactly the case of quantum electrodynamics displaying just three diverging diagrams. This procedure gives observables in very close agreement with experiment as seen e.g. for electron gyromagnetic ratio.\n\nRenormalizability has become an essential criterion for a quantum field theory to be considered as a viable one. All the theories describing fundamental interactions, except gravitation whose quantum counterpart is presently under very active research, are renormalizable theories.\n\nAn argument by Freeman Dyson shows that the radius of convergence of the perturbation series in QED is zero. The basic argument goes as follows: if the coupling constant were negative, this would be equivalent to the Coulomb force constant being negative. This would \"reverse\" the electromagnetic interaction so that \"like\" charges would \"attract\" and \"unlike\" charges would \"repel\". This would render the vacuum unstable against decay into a cluster of electrons on one side of the universe and a cluster of positrons on the other side of the universe. Because the theory is 'sick' for any negative value of the coupling constant, the series do not converge, but are an asymptotic series.\n\nFrom a modern perspective, we say that QED is not well defined as a quantum field theory to arbitrarily high energy. The coupling constant runs to infinity at finite energy, signalling a Landau pole. The problem is essentially that QED appears to suffer from quantum triviality issues. This is one of the motivations for embedding QED within a Grand Unified Theory.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "25270", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25270", "title": "Quine (computing)", "text": "Quine (computing)\n\nA quine is a non-empty computer program which takes no input and produces a copy of its own source code as its only output. The standard terms for these programs in the computability theory and computer science literature are \"self-replicating programs\", \"self-reproducing programs\", and \"self-copying programs\".\n\nA quine is a fixed point of an execution environment, when the execution environment is viewed as a function transforming programs into their outputs. Quines are possible in any Turing complete programming language, as a direct consequence of Kleene's recursion theorem. For amusement, programmers sometimes attempt to develop the shortest possible quine in any given programming language.\n\nThe name \"quine\" was coined by Douglas Hofstadter, in his popular science book \"\", in the honor of philosopher Willard Van Orman Quine (1908–2000), who made an extensive study of indirect self-reference, and in particular for the following paradox-producing expression, known as Quine's paradox:\n\"Yields falsehood when preceded by its quotation\" yields falsehood when preceded by its quotation.\nIn some languages, particularly scripting languages, an empty source file is a fixed point of the language, being a valid program that produces no output. Such an empty program, submitted as \"the world's smallest self reproducing program\", once won the \"worst abuse of the rules\" prize in the International Obfuscated C Code Contest.\n\nThe idea of self-reproducing automata came from the dawn of computing, if not before. John von Neumann theorized about them in the 1940s. Later, Paul Bratley and Jean Millo's article \"Computer Recreations: Self-Reproducing Automata\" discussed them in 1972.\nBratley first became interested in self-reproducing programs after seeing the first known such program written in Atlas Autocode at Edinburgh in the 1960s by the University of Edinburgh lecturer and researcher Hamish Dewar. \n\nThe \"download source\" requirement of the Affero General Public License is based on the idea of a quine.\n\nIn general, the method used to create a quine in any programming language is to have, within the program, two pieces: (a) code used to do the actual printing and (b) data that represents the textual form of the code. The code functions by using the data to print the code (which makes sense since the data represents the textual form of the code), but it also uses the data, processed in a simple way, to print the textual representation of the data itself. \n\nThe following Java code demonstrates the basic structure of a quine.\npublic class Quine\nThe source code contains a string array of itself, which is output twice, once inside quotation marks.\n\nThe same idea is used in the following SQL quine:\n\nSELECT REPLACE(REPLACE('SELECT REPLACE(REPLACE(\"$\",CHAR(34),CHAR(39)),CHAR(36),\"$\") AS Quine',CHAR(34),CHAR(39)),CHAR(36),'SELECT REPLACE(REPLACE(\"$\",CHAR(34),CHAR(39)),CHAR(36),\"$\") AS Quine') AS Quine\nA very concise quine with the same basic structure can be written in Lua:\n\nx = \"x = [\" .. \"[\" .. x .. \"]\" .. \"]\\nprint(\" .. x)\nprint(\"x = [\" .. \"[\" .. x .. \"]\" .. \"]\\nprint(\" .. x)\n\nAnd in Python:\ns = 's = %r\\nprint(s%%s)'\nprint(s%s)\n\nIn Scala:\n\nobject Quine extends App {\n\nIn R:\n\nm<-\"m<-0;cat(sub(0,deparse(m),m))\";cat(sub(0,deparse(m),m))\nIn Rust: \n\nfn main() {\n\nIn Go: \n\npackage main\n\nimport \"fmt\"\n\nfunc main() {\n\nvar s = `package main\n\nimport \"fmt\"\n\nfunc main() {\n\nvar s = `\nIn OCaml: \n(fun s -> Printf.printf \"%s%S;;\\n\" s s) \"(fun s -> Printf.printf \\\"%s%S;;\\\\n\\\" s s) \";;\nIn Haskell: \nmain = putStr s » print s where s = \"main = putStr s » print s where s = \"\nQuines can take advantage of codice_1. For example, this Ruby quine:\n\neval s=\"print 'eval s=';p s\"\n\nQuines, per definition, cannot receive \"any\" form of input, including reading a file, which means a quine is considered to be \"cheating\" if it looks at its own source code. The following shell script is not a quine:\n\ncat $0\nNor is this succinct use of the Shebang:\n\nThe above also applies to this JavaScript code:\n\nfunction a() {\na()\nIn PHP:\n<? highlight_file(__FILE__) ?>\n\nA program in the joke language HQ9+ is a quine if and only if the source code consists only of zero or more '+' characters and a single 'Q' character (the 'Q' command prints a quine and '+' prints nothing):\n\nOne of the shortest cheating quines is provided by Forth, which has a built-in command to read its own source:\n\nOther questionable techniques include making use of compiler messages; for example, in the GW-BASIC environment, entering \"Syntax Error\" will cause the interpreter to respond with \"Syntax Error\". Ignoring the restriction that quines be non-empty, there are many examples of programming languages where an empty program is valid (such as C). Such programs generally do nothing, in effect, reproducing the program.\n\nThe quine concept can be extended to multiple levels or recursion, originating \"ouroboros programs\", or quine-relays. This should not be confused with Multiquines.\n\nThis Java program outputs the source for a C++ program that outputs the original Java code.\nSuch programs have been produced with various cycle lengths:\n\n\nDavid Madore, creator of Unlambda, describes multiquines as follows:\n\"A multiquine is a set of r different programs (in r different languages — without this condition we could take them all equal to a single quine), each of which is able to print any of the r programs (including itself) according to the command line argument it is passed. (Note that cheating is not allowed: the command line arguments must not be too long — passing the full text of a program is considered cheating).\"\nA multiquine consisting of 2 languages (or biquine) would be a program which:\n\nA biquine could then be seen as a set of two programs, both of which are able to print either of the two, depending on the command line argument supplied.\n\nTheoretically, there is no limit on the number of languages in a multiquine,\na 5-part multiquine (or pentaquine) has been produced with Python, Perl, C, NewLISP, and F#\nand there is also a 25-language multiquine.\n\nA radiation-hardened quine is a quine that can have any single character removed and still produce the original program with no missing character. Of necessity, such quines are much more convoluted than ordinary quines, as is seen by the following example in Ruby:\neval='eval$q=%q(puts %q(10210/#{1 1 if 1==21}}/.i rescue##/\n\n1 1\"[13,213].max_by{|s|s.size}#\"##\").gsub(/\\d/){[\"=\\47eval$q=%q(#$q)#\\47##\\47\n\nexit)#'##'\n\ninstance_eval='eval$q=%q(puts %q(10210/#{1 1 if 1==21}}/.i rescue##/\n\n1 1\"[13,213].max_by{|s|s.size}#\"##\").gsub(/\\d/){[\"=\\47eval$q=%q(#$q)#\\47##\\47\n\nexit)#'##'\n\n/#{eval eval if eval==instance_eval}}/.i rescue##/\n\neval eval\"[eval||=9,instance_eval||=9].max_by{|s|s.size}#\"##\"\n\n"}
{"id": "25271", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25271", "title": "Field of fractions", "text": "Field of fractions\n\nIn abstract algebra, the field of fractions of an integral domain is the smallest field in which it can be embedded. The elements of the field of fractions of the integral domain formula_1 are equivalence classes (see the construction below) written as formula_2 with formula_3 and formula_4 in formula_1 and formula_6. The field of fractions of formula_1 is sometimes denoted by formula_8 or formula_9.\n\nMathematicians refer to this construction as the field of fractions, fraction field, field of quotients, or quotient field. All four are in common usage. The expression \"quotient field\" may sometimes run the risk of confusion with the quotient of a ring by an ideal, which is a quite different concept.\n\n\nLet formula_1 be any integral domain. For formula_17 with formula_18, the fraction formula_19 denotes the equivalence class of pairs formula_20, where formula_20 is equivalent to formula_22 if and only if formula_23.\nThe \"field of fractions\" formula_8 is defined as the set of all such fractions formula_19.\nThe sum of formula_19 and formula_29 is defined as formula_30, and the product of formula_19 and formula_29 is defined as formula_33 (one checks that these are well defined).\n\nThe embedding of formula_1 in formula_8 maps each formula_36 in formula_1 to the fraction formula_38 for any nonzero formula_39 (the equivalence class is independent of the choice formula_40). This is modelled on the identity formula_41.\n\nThe field of fractions of formula_1 is characterised by the following universal property: if formula_43 is an injective ring homomorphism from formula_1 into a field formula_45, then there exists a unique ring homomorphism formula_46 which extends formula_47.\n\nThere is a categorical interpretation of this construction. Let formula_48 be the category of integral domains and injective ring maps. The functor from formula_48 to the category of fields which takes every integral domain to its fraction field and every homomorphism to the induced map on fields (which exists by the universal property) is the left adjoint of the forgetful functor from the category of fields to formula_48.\n\nA multiplicative identity is not required for the role of the integral domain; this construction can be applied to any nonzero commutative rng with no nonzero zero divisors.\n\nFor any commutative ring formula_1 and any multiplicative set formula_52 in formula_1, the localization formula_52formula_1 is the commutative ring consisting of fractions formula_56 with formula_57 and formula_58,\nwhere now formula_59 is equivalent to formula_60 if and only if there exists formula_61 such that formula_62.\nTwo special cases of this are notable:\n\n"}
{"id": "25272", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25272", "title": "Quadratic reciprocity", "text": "Quadratic reciprocity\n\nIn number theory, the law of quadratic reciprocity is a theorem about modular arithmetic that gives conditions for the solvability of quadratic equations modulo prime numbers. There are a number of equivalent statements of the theorem. One version of the law states that for \"p\" and \"q\" odd prime numbers,\nwhere \ndenotes the Legendre symbol.\n\nThis law, combined with the properties of the Legendre symbol, means that any Legendre symbol can be calculated. This makes it possible to determine, for any quadratic equation, formula_3 where \"p\" is an odd prime, whether it has a solution. However, it does not provide any help at all for actually \"finding\" the solution. The solution can be found using quadratic residues.\n\nThe theorem was conjectured by Euler and Legendre and first proved by Gauss. He refers to it as the \"fundamental theorem\" in the \"Disquisitiones Arithmeticae\" and his papers, writing\n\nPrivately he referred to it as the \"golden theorem.\" He published six proofs, and two more were found in his posthumous papers. There are now over 200 published proofs.\n\nThe first section of this article gives a special case of quadratic reciprocity that is representative of the general case. The second section gives the formulations of quadratic reciprocity found by Legendre and Gauss.\n\nConsider the polynomial formula_4 and its values for formula_5 The prime factorizations of these values are given as follows:\n\nThe prime numbers appearing as factors of formula_6 are formula_7, and every prime numbers whose final digit is formula_8 or formula_9. No primes ending in formula_10 or formula_11 ever appear. Another way of phrasing this is that the primes formula_12 for which there exists an formula_13 such that formula_14 are precisely formula_15, and those primes formula_12 that are formula_17. Or in other words, when formula_12 is a prime that is neither formula_19 nor formula_20, formula_20 is a quadratic residue formula_22 iff formula_12 is formula_8 or formula_25 modulo formula_20 (if the last digit was formula_25 or formula_28 there would be a contradiction since formula_29). In other words, formula_20 is a quadratic residue modulo formula_12 iff formula_12 is a quadratic residue modulo formula_20.\n\nThe law of quadratic reciprocity gives a similar characterization of prime divisors of formula_34 for any integer formula_35.\n\nA quadratic residue (mod \"n\") is any number congruent to a square (mod \"n\"). A quadratic nonresidue (mod \"n\") is any number that is not congruent to a square (mod \"n\"). The adjective \"quadratic\" can be dropped if the context makes it clear that it is implied. When working modulo primes (as in this article), it is usual to treat zero as a special case. By doing so, the following statements become true:\n\n\nThis table is complete for odd primes less than 50. To check whether a number \"m\" is a quadratic residue mod one of these primes \"p\", find \"a\" ≡ \"m\" (mod \"p\") and 0 ≤ \"a\" < \"p\". If \"a\" is in row \"p\", then \"m\" is a residue (mod \"p\"); if \"a\" is not in row \"p\" of the table, then \"m\" is a nonresidue (mod \"p\").\n\nThe quadratic reciprocity law is the statement that certain patterns found in the table are true in general.\n\nIn this article, \"p\" and \"q\" always refer to distinct positive odd prime numbers.\n\nTrivially 1 is a quadratic residue for all primes. The question becomes more interesting for −1. Examining the table, we find −1 in rows 5, 13, 17, 29, 37, and 41 but not in rows 3, 7, 11, 19, 23, 31, 43 or 47. The former set of primes are all congruent to 1 modulo 4, and the latter are congruent to 3 modulo 4.\n\nExamining the table, we find 2 in rows 7, 17, 23, 31, 41, and 47, but not in rows 3, 5, 11, 13, 19, 29, 37, or 43. The former primes are all ≡ ±1 (mod 8), and the latter are all ≡ ±3 (mod 8). This leads to\n\n−2 is in rows 3, 11, 17, 19, 41, 43, but not in rows 5, 7, 13, 23, 29, 31, 37, or 47. The former are ≡ 1 or ≡ 3 (mod 8), and the latter are ≡ 5, 7 (mod 8).\n\n3 is in rows 11, 13, 23, 37, and 47, but not in rows 5, 7, 17, 19, 29, 31, 41, or 43. The former are ≡ ±1 (mod 12) and the latter are all ≡ ±5 (mod 12).\n\n−3 is in rows 7, 13, 19, 31, 37, and 43 but not in rows 5, 11, 17, 23, 29, 41, or 47. The former are ≡ 1 (mod 3) and the latter ≡ 2 (mod 3).\n\nSince the only residue (mod 3) is 1, we see that −3 is a quadratic residue modulo every prime which is a residue modulo 3.\n\n5 is in rows 11, 19, 29, 31, and 41 but not in rows 3, 7, 13, 17, 23, 37, 43, or 47. The former are ≡ ±1 (mod 5) and the latter are ≡ ±2 (mod 5).\n\nSince the only residues (mod 5) are ±1, we see that 5 is a quadratic residue modulo every prime which is a residue modulo 5.\n\n−5 is in rows 3, 7, 23, 29, 41, 43, and 47 but not in rows 11, 13, 17, 19, 31, or 37. The former are ≡ 1, 3, 7, 9 (mod 20) and the latter are ≡ 11, 13, 17, 19 (mod 20).\n\nThe observations about −3 and 5 continue to hold: −7 is a residue modulo \"p\" if and only if \"p\" is a residue modulo 7, −11 is a residue modulo \"p\" if and only if \"p\" is a residue modulo 11, 13 is a residue (mod \"p\") if and only if \"p\" is a residue modulo 13, etc. The more complicated-looking rules for the quadratic characters of 3 and −5, which depend upon congruences modulo 12 and 20 respectively, are simply the ones for −3 and 5 working with the first supplement.\n\nThe generalization of the rules for −3 and 5 is Gauss's statement of quadratic reciprocity:\n\nThese statements may be combined:\n\nAnother way to organize the data is to see which primes are residues mod which other primes, as illustrated in the above table. The entry in row \"p\" column \"q\" is R if \"q\" is a quadratic residue (mod \"p\"); if it is a nonresidue the entry is N.\n\nIf the row, or the column, or both, are ≡ 1 (mod 4) the entry is blue or green; if both row and column are ≡ 3 (mod 4), it is yellow or orange.\n\nThe blue and green entries are symmetric around the diagonal: The entry for row \"p\", column \"q\" is R (resp N) if and only if the entry at row \"q\", column \"p\", is R (resp N).\n\nThe yellow and orange ones, on the other hand, are antisymmetric: The entry for row \"p\", column \"q\" is R (resp N) if and only if the entry at row \"q\", column \"p\", is N (resp R).\n\nIt is a simple exercise to prove that Legendre's and Gauss's statements are equivalent – it requires no more than the first supplement and the facts about multiplying residues and nonresidues.\n\nThe early proofs of quadratic reciprocity are relatively unilluminating. The situation changed when Gauss used Gauss sums to show that quadratic fields are subfields of cyclotomic fields, and implicitly deduced quadratic reciprocity from a reciprocity theorem for cyclotomic fields. His proof was cast in modern form by later algebraic number theorists. This proof served as a template for class field theory, which can be viewed as a vast generalization of quadratic reciprocity.\n\nRobert Langlands formulated the Langlands program, which gives a conjectural vast generalization of class field theory. He wrote:\n\nThere are a number of ways to state the theorem. Keep in mind that Euler and Legendre did not have Gauss's congruence notation, nor did Gauss have the Legendre symbol.\n\nIn this article \"p\" and \"q\" always refer to distinct positive odd primes.\n\nFermat proved (or claimed to have proved) a number of theorems about expressing a prime by a quadratic form:\n\nHe did not state the law of quadratic reciprocity, although the cases −1, ±2, and ±3 are easy deductions from these and other of his theorems.\n\nHe also claimed to have a proof that if the prime number \"p\" ends with 7, (in base 10) and the prime number \"q\" ends in 3, and \"p\" ≡ \"q\" ≡ 3 (mod 4), then\n\nEuler conjectured, and Lagrange proved, that\n\nProving these and other statements of Fermat was one of the things that led mathematicians to the reciprocity theorem.\n\nTranslated into modern notation, Euler stated:\n\n\nThis is equivalent to quadratic reciprocity.\n\nHe could not prove it, but he did prove the second supplement.\n\nFermat proved that if \"p\" is a prime number and \"a\" is an integer, \n\nThus, if \"p\" does not divide \"a\", \n\nLegendre lets \"a\" and \"A\" represent positive primes ≡ 1 (mod 4) and \"b\" and \"B\" positive primes ≡ 3 (mod 4), and sets out a table of eight theorems that together are equivalent to quadratic reciprocity:\n\nHe says that since expressions of the form\n\nwill come up so often he will abbreviate them as:\n\nThis is now known as the Legendre symbol, and an equivalent definition is used today: for all integers \"a\" and all odd primes \"p\"\n\nHe notes that these can be combined:\n\nA number of proofs, especially those based on Gauss's Lemma, explicitly calculate this formula.\n\nLegendre's attempt to prove reciprocity is based on a theorem of his:\n\nExample. Theorem I is handled by letting \"a\" ≡ 1 and \"b\" ≡ 3 (mod 4) be primes and assuming that formula_66 and, contrary the theorem, that formula_67 Then formula_68 has a solution, and taking congruences (mod 4) leads to a contradiction.\n\nThis technique doesn't work for Theorem VIII. Let \"b\" ≡ \"B\" ≡ 3 (mod 4), and assume\n\nThen if there is another prime \"p\" ≡ 1 (mod 4) such that\n\nthe solvability of formula_71 leads to a contradiction (mod 4). But Legendre was unable to prove there has to be such a prime \"p\"; he was later able to show that all that is required is:\n\nbut he couldn't prove that either. Hilbert symbol (below) discusses how techniques based on the existence of solutions to formula_73 can be made to work.\n\nGauss first proves the supplementary laws. He sets the basis for induction by proving the theorem for ±3 and ±5. Noting that it is easier to state for −3 and +5 than it is for +3 or −5, he states the general theorem in the form:\n\nIntroducing the notation \"a\" R \"b\" (resp. \"a\" N \"b\") to mean \"a\" is a quadratic residue (resp. nonresidue) (mod \"b\"), and letting \"a\", \"a\"′, etc. represent positive primes ≡ 1 (mod 4) and \"b\", \"b\"′, etc. positive primes ≡ 3 (mod 4), he breaks it out into the same 8 cases as Legendre:\n\nIn the next Article he generalizes this to what are basically the rules for the Jacobi symbol (below). Letting \"A\", \"A\"′, etc. represent any (prime or composite) positive numbers ≡ 1 (mod 4) and \"B\", \"B\"′, etc. positive numbers ≡ 3 (mod 4):\n\nAll of these cases take the form \"if a prime is a residue (mod a composite), then the composite is a residue or nonresidue (mod the prime), depending on the congruences (mod 4)\". He proves that these follow from cases 1) - 8).\n\nGauss needed, and was able to prove, a lemma similar to the one Legendre needed:\n\nThe proof of quadratic reciprocity uses complete induction.\n\nThese can be combined:\n\nA number of proofs of the theorem, especially those based on Gauss sums derive this formula. or the splitting of primes in algebraic number fields,\n\nNote that the statements in this section are equivalent to quadratic reciprocity: if, for example, Euler's version is assumed, the Legendre-Gauss version can be deduced from it, and vice versa.\n\nThis can be proven using Gauss's lemma.\n\nGauss's fourth proof consists of proving this theorem (by comparing two formulas for the value of Gauss sums) and then restricting it to two primes. He then gives an example: Let \"a\" = 3, \"b\" = 5, \"c\" = 7, and \"d\" = 11. Three of these, 3, 7, and 11 ≡ 3 (mod 4), so \"m\" ≡ 3 (mod 4). 5×7×11 R 3; 3×7×11 R 5; 3×5×11 R 7;  and  3×5×7 N 11, so there are an odd number of nonresidues.\n\nThe Jacobi symbol is a generalization of the Legendre symbol; the main difference is that the bottom number has to be positive and odd, but does not have to be prime. If it is prime, the two symbols agree. It obeys the same rules of manipulation as the Legendre symbol. In particular\n\nand if both numbers are positive and odd (this is sometimes called \"Jacobi's reciprocity law\"):\n\nHowever, if the Jacobi symbol is 1 but the denominator is not a prime, it does not necessarily follow that the numerator is a quadratic residue of the denominator. Gauss's cases 9) - 14) above can be expressed in terms of Jacobi symbols:\n\nand since \"p\" is prime the left hand side is a Legendre symbol, and we know whether \"M\" is a residue modulo \"p\" or not.\n\nThe formulas listed in the preceding section are true for Jacobi symbols as long as the symbols are defined. Euler's formula may be written\n\nExample.\n\n2 is a residue modulo the primes 7, 23 and 31:\n\nBut 2 is not a quadratic residue modulo 5, so it can't be one modulo 15. This is related to the problem Legendre had: if formula_91 then \"a\" is a non-residue modulo every prime in the arithmetic progression \"m\" + 4\"a\", \"m\" + 8\"a\", ..., if there \"are\" any primes in this series, but that wasn't proved until decades after Legendre.\n\nEisenstein's formula requires relative primality conditions (which are true if the numbers are prime)\n\nThe quadratic reciprocity law can be formulated in terms of the Hilbert symbol formula_95 where \"a\" and \"b\" are any two nonzero rational numbers and \"v\" runs over all the non-trivial absolute values of the rationals (the archimedean one and the \"p\"-adic absolute values for primes \"p\"). The Hilbert symbol formula_95 is 1 or −1. It is defined to be 1 if and only if the equation formula_97 has a solution in the completion of the rationals at \"v\" other than formula_98. The Hilbert reciprocity law states that formula_95, for fixed \"a\" and \"b\" and varying \"v\", is 1 for all but finitely many \"v\" and the product of formula_95 over all \"v\" is 1. (This formally resembles the residue theorem from complex analysis.)\n\nThe proof of Hilbert reciprocity reduces to checking a few special cases, and the non-trivial cases turn out to be equivalent to the main law and the two supplementary laws of quadratic reciprocity for the Legendre symbol. There is no kind of reciprocity in the Hilbert reciprocity law; its name simply indicates the historical source of the result in quadratic reciprocity. Unlike quadratic reciprocity, which requires sign conditions (namely positivity of the primes involved) and a special treatment of the prime 2, the Hilbert reciprocity law treats all absolute values of the rationals on an equal footing. Therefore, it is a more natural way of expressing quadratic reciprocity with a view towards generalization: the Hilbert reciprocity law extends with very few changes to all global fields and this extension can rightly be considered a generalization of quadratic reciprocity to all global fields.\nThere are also quadratic reciprocity laws in rings other than the integers.\n\nIn his second monograph on quartic reciprocity Gauss stated quadratic reciprocity for the ring formula_101 of Gaussian integers, saying that it is a corollary of the biquadratic law in formula_102 but did not provide a proof of either theorem. Peter Gustav Lejeune Dirichlet showed that the law informula_101 can be deduced from the law for formula_104 without using biquadratic reciprocity.\n\nFor an odd Gaussian prime formula_105 and a Gaussian integer formula_106 relatively prime to with formula_107 define the quadratic character for formula_101 by:\n\nLet formula_110 be distinct Gaussian primes where \"a\" and \"c\" are odd and \"b\" and \"d\" are even. Then\n\nConsider the following third root of unity:\n\nThe ring of Eisenstein integers is formula_113 For an Eisenstein prime formula_114 and an Eisenstein integer formula_106 with formula_116 define the quadratic character for formula_117 by the formula\n\nLet λ = \"a\" + \"bω\" and μ = \"c\" + \"dω\" be distinct Eisenstein primes where \"a\" and \"c\" are not divisible by 3 and \"b\" and \"d\" are divisible by 3. Eisenstein proved\n\nThe above laws are special cases of more general laws that hold for the ring of integers in any imaginary quadratic number field. Let \"k\" be an imaginary quadratic number field with ring of integers formula_120 For a prime ideal formula_121 with odd norm formula_122 and formula_123 define the quadratic character for formula_124 as\n\nfor an arbitrary ideal formula_126 factored into prime ideals formula_127 define\n\nand for formula_129 define\n\nLet formula_131 i.e. formula_132 is an integral basis for formula_120 For formula_134 with odd norm formula_135 define (ordinary) integers \"a\", \"b\", \"c\", \"d\" by the equations,\n\nand a function\n\nIf \"m\" = \"Nμ\" and \"n\" = \"Nν\" are both odd, Herglotz proved\n\nAlso, if\n\nThen\n\nLet \"F\" be a finite field with \"q\" = \"p\" elements, where \"p\" is an odd prime number and \"n\" is positive, and let \"F\"[\"x\"] be the ring of polynomials in one variable with coefficients in \"F\". If formula_141 and \"f\" is irreducible, monic, and has positive degree, define the quadratic character for \"F\"[\"x\"] in the usual manner:\n\nIf formula_143 is a product of monic irreducibles let\n\nDedekind proved that if formula_141 are monic and have positive degrees,\n\nThe attempt to generalize quadratic reciprocity for powers higher than the second was one of the main goals that led 19th century mathematicians, including Carl Friedrich Gauss, Peter Gustav Lejeune Dirichlet, Carl Gustav Jakob Jacobi, Gotthold Eisenstein, Richard Dedekind, Ernst Kummer, and David Hilbert to the study of general algebraic number fields and their rings of integers; specifically Kummer invented ideals in order to state and prove higher reciprocity laws.\n\nThe ninth in the list of 23 unsolved problems which David Hilbert proposed to the Congress of Mathematicians in 1900 asked for the \n\"Proof of the most general reciprocity law [f]or an arbitrary number field\". In 1923 Emil Artin, building upon work by Philipp Furtwängler, Teiji Takagi, Helmut Hasse and others, discovered a general theorem for which all known reciprocity laws are special cases; he proved it in 1927.\n\nThe links below provide more detailed discussions of these theorems.\n\nThe \"Disquisitiones Arithmeticae\" has been translated (from Latin) into English and German. The German edition includes all of Gauss's papers on number theory: all the proofs of quadratic reciprocity, the determination of the sign of the Gauss sum, the investigations into biquadratic reciprocity, and unpublished notes. Footnotes referencing the \"Disquisitiones Arithmeticae\" are of the form \"Gauss, DA, Art. \"n\"\".\n\nThe two monographs Gauss published on biquadratic reciprocity have consecutively numbered sections: the first contains §§ 1–23 and the second §§ 24–76. Footnotes referencing these are of the form \"Gauss, BQ, § \"n\"\". \n\nThese are in Gauss's \"Werke\", Vol II, pp. 65–92 and 93–148. German translations are in pp. 511–533 and 534–586 of \"Untersuchungen über höhere Arithmetik.\"\n\nEvery textbook on elementary number theory (and quite a few on algebraic number theory) has a proof of quadratic reciprocity. Two are especially noteworthy:\n\nFranz Lemmermeyer's \"Reciprocity Laws: From Euler to Eisenstein\" has \"many\" proofs (some in exercises) of both quadratic and higher-power reciprocity laws and a discussion of their history. Its immense bibliography includes literature citations for 196 different published proofs for the quadratic reciprocity law.\n\nKenneth Ireland and Michael Rosen's \"A Classical Introduction to Modern Number Theory\" also has many proofs of quadratic reciprocity (and many exercises), and covers the cubic and biquadratic cases as well. Exercise 13.26 (p. 202) says it all\n\n"}
{"id": "25274", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25274", "title": "Quantum information", "text": "Quantum information\n\nIn physics and computer science, quantum information is information that is held in the state of a quantum system. Quantum information is the basic entity of study in quantum information theory, and can be manipulated using engineering techniques known as quantum information processing. Much like classical information can be processed with digital computers, transmitted from place to place, manipulated with algorithms, and analyzed with the mathematics of computer science, so also analogous concepts apply to quantum information.\n\nQuantum information differs strongly from classical information, epitomized by the bit, in many striking and unfamiliar ways. Among these are the following:\n\n\nThe study of all of the above topics and differences comprises quantum information theory.\n\nThe theory of quantum information is a result of the effort to generalize classical information theory to the quantum world. Quantum information theory aims to investigate the question \"How is information stored in a state of a quantum system?\". Under the no-teleportation theorem, a quantum state cannot be precisely converted into classical bits. The information content of a message \"M\" can nevertheless be measured in terms of the minimum number \"n\" of qubits needed to encode the message. Such a message \"M\" is encoded with \"n\" qubits and \"n\" classical bits that describe the relative arrangement of the \"n\" qubits. The qubit is the smallest possible unit of quantum information.\n\nQuantum information can be transmitted through quantum channels. These have finite capacity and are analogous to the classical case, described by the noisy-channel coding theorem which defines the maximum channel capacity of a classical communications channel. An important breakthrough for the theory of quantum information occurred when quantum error correction codes and fault-tolerant quantum computation schemes were discovered .\n\nAn important step in quantum information theory is the manipulation of quantum information. This requires quantum logic gates, in rough analog to the processing of classical information with digital circuits. \n\nMany journals publish research in quantum information science, although only a few are dedicated to this area. Among these are \n\n"}
{"id": "25275", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25275", "title": "Quinolone", "text": "Quinolone\n\nQuinolone may refer to:\n"}
{"id": "25277", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25277", "title": "Quarterback", "text": "Quarterback\n\nA quarterback (commonly abbreviated to QB) is a position in American and Canadian football. Quarterbacks are members of the offensive team and line up directly behind the offensive line. In modern American football, the quarterback is usually considered the leader of the offensive team, and is often responsible for calling the play in the huddle.\n\nIn modern American football, the quarterback is usually the leader of the offense. The quarterback touches the ball on almost every offensive play, and his successes and failures can have a significant impact on the fortunes of his team. Accordingly, the quarterback is among the most glorified and scrutinized positions in team sports. Prior to each play, the quarterback will usually tell the rest of his team which play the team will run. After the team is lined up, the center will pass the ball back to the quarterback (a process called the snap). Usually on a running play, the quarterback will then hand or pitch the ball backwards to a half back or full back. On a passing play, the quarterback is almost always the player responsible for trying to throw the ball downfield to an eligible receiver downfield. Additionally, the quarterback will often run with the ball himself, which could be part of a designed play like the option run or quarterback sneak, or it could be an impromptu effort to avoid being sacked by the defense.\n\nDepending on the offensive scheme by his team, the quarterback's role can vary. In systems like the triple option the quarterback will only pass the ball a few times per a game, if at all, while the pass-heavy spread offense as run by schools like Texas Tech requires quarterbacks to throw the ball in most plays. The passing game is emphasized heavily in the Canadian Football League (CFL), where there are only three downs as opposed to the four downs used in American football, a larger field of play and an extra eligible receiver. Different skillsets are required of the quarterback in each system - quarterbacks that perform well in a pass-heavy spread offensive system, a popular offensive scheme in the NCAA and NFHS, rarely perform well in the National Football League (NFL), as the fundamentals of the pro-style offense used in the NFL are very different from those in the spread system. while quarterbacks in Canadian football need to be able to throw the ball often and accurately. In general, quarterbacks need to have physical skills such as arm strength, mobility, and quick throwing motion, in addition to intangibles such as competitiveness, leadership, intelligence, and downfield vision.\n\nIn the NFL, quarterbacks are required to wear a uniform number between 1 and 19. In the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) and National Federation of State High School Associations (NFHS), quarterbacks are required to wear a uniform number between 1 and 49; in the NFHS, the quarterback can also wear a number between 80 and 89. In the CFL, the quarterback can wear any number from 0 to 49 and 70 to 99. Because of their numbering, quarterbacks are eligible receivers in the NCAA, NFHS, and CFL; in the NFL, quarterbacks are eligible receivers if they are not lined up directly under center.\n\nIn the NFL, while the starting quarterback has no other responsibility or authority, he may, depending on the league or individual team, have various informal duties, such as participation in pre-game ceremonies, the coin toss, or other events outside the game.\n\nOften compared to captains of other team sports, before the implementation of NFL team captains in 2007, the starting quarterback was usually the \"de facto\" team leader and well-respected player on and off the field. Since 2007, when the NFL allowed teams to designate several captains to serve as on-field leaders, the starting quarterback has usually been one of the team captains as the leader of the team's offense.\n\nAfter a Super Bowl victory, the starting quarterback is the first player (and third person after the team owner and head coach) to be presented with the Vince Lombardi Trophy. The starting quarterback of the victorious Super Bowl team is often chosen for the \"I'm going to Disney World!\" campaign (which includes a trip to Walt Disney World for them and their families), whether they are the Super Bowl MVP or not; examples include Joe Montana (XXIII), Trent Dilfer (XXXV), and Peyton Manning (50). Dilfer was chosen even though teammate Ray Lewis was the MVP of Super Bowl XXXV, due to the bad publicity from Lewis' murder trial the prior year.\n\nIn addition to their main role, quarterbacks are occasionally used in other roles. Most teams utilize a backup quarterback as their holder on placekicks. A benefit of using quarterbacks as holders is that it would be easier to pull off a fake field goal attempt, but many coaches prefer to use punters as holders because a punter will have far more time in practice sessions to work with the kicker than any quarterback would. In the Wildcat, a formation where a halfback lines up behind the center and the quarterback lines up out wide, the quarterback can be used as a receiving target or a blocker. A more rare use for a quarterback is to punt the ball himself, a play known as a quick kick. Denver Broncos quarterback John Elway was known to perform quick kicks occasionally, typically when the Broncos were facing a third-and-long situation. Philadelphia Eagles quarterback Randall Cunningham, an All-America punter in college, was also known to punt the ball occasionally, and was assigned as the team's default punter for certain situations, such as when the team was backed up inside their own five-yard line.\n\nAs Roger Staubach's back-up, Dallas Cowboys quarterback Danny White was also the team's punter, opening strategic possibilities for coach Tom Landry. Ascending the starting role upon Staubach's retirement, White held his position as the team's punter for several seasons—a double duty he performed to All-American standard at Arizona State University. White also had two touchdown receptions as a Dallas Cowboy, both from the halfback option.\n\nIf quarterbacks are uncomfortable with the formation the defense is using, they may call an audible change to their play. For example, if a quarterback receives the call to execute a running play, but he notices that the defense is ready to blitz—that is, to send additional defensive backs across the line of scrimmage in an attempt to tackle the quarterback or hurt his ability to pass—the quarterback may want to change the play. To do this, the quarterback yells a special code, like \"Blue 42,\" or \"Texas 29,\" which tells the offense to switch to a specific play or formation, but it all depends on the quarterback's judgment of the defense's alignment.\n\nQuarterbacks can also \"spike\" (throw the football at the ground) to stop the official game clock. For example, if a team is down by a field goal with only seconds remaining, a quarterback may spike the ball to prevent the game clock from running out. This usually allows the field goal unit to come onto the field, or attempt a final \"Hail Mary pass\". However, if a team is winning, a quarterback can keep the clock running by kneeling after the snap. This is normally done when the opposing team has no timeouts and there is little time left in the game, as it allows a team to burn up the remaining time on the clock without risking a turnover or injury.\n\nA dual-threat quarterback possesses the skills and physique to run with the ball if necessary. With the rise of several blitz-heavy defensive schemes and increasingly faster defensive players, the importance of a mobile quarterback has been redefined. While arm power, accuracy, and pocket presence – the ability to successfully operate from within the \"pocket\" formed by his blockers – are still the most important quarterback virtues, the ability to elude or run past defenders creates an additional threat that allows greater flexibility in a team's passing and running game.\n\nDual-threat quarterbacks have historically been more prolific at the college level. Typically, a quarterback with exceptional quickness is used in an option offense, which allows the quarterback to hand the ball off, run it himself, or pitch it to the running back following him at a distance of three yards outside and one yard behind. This type of offense forces defenders to commit to the running back up the middle, the quarterback around the end, or the running back trailing the quarterback. It is then that the quarterback has the \"option\" to identify which match-up is most favorable to the offense as the play unfolds and exploit that defensive weakness. In the college game, many schools employ several plays that are designed for the quarterback to run with the ball. This is much less common in professional football, except for a quarterback sneak, but there is still an emphasis on being mobile enough to escape a heavy pass rush. Historically, high-profile dual-threat quarterbacks in the NFL were uncommon, Steve Young and John Elway being among the notable exceptions, leading their teams to three and five Super Bowl appearances respectively; and Michael Vick, whose rushing ability was a rarity in the early 2000s, although he never led his team to a Super Bowl. In recent years, quarterbacks with dual-threat capabilities have become more popular. Examples of dual-threat quarterbacks currently playing in the NFL include Andrew Luck, Cam Newton, Ryan Tannehill, Blake Bortles, Tyrod Taylor, Aaron Rodgers, Alex Smith, Russell Wilson, Jameis Winston and Marcus Mariota.\n\nSome teams employ a strategy which involves the use of more than one quarterback during the course of a game. This is more common at lower levels of football, such as high school or small college, but rare in major college or professional football.\n\nThere are four circumstances in which a two-quarterback system may be used.\n\nThe first is when a team is in the process of determining which quarterback will eventually be the starter, and may choose to use each quarterback for part of the game in order to compare the performances. For instance, the Seattle Seahawks' Pete Carroll used the pre-season games in 2012 to select Russell Wilson as the starting quarterback over Matt Flynn and Tarvaris Jackson.\n\nThe second is a starter–reliever system, in which the starting quarterback splits the regular season playing time with the backup quarterback, although the former will start playoff games. This strategy is rare, and was last seen in the NFL in the \"WoodStrock\" combination of Don Strock and David Woodley, which took the Miami Dolphins to the Epic in Miami in 1982 and Super Bowl XVII the following year. The starter-reliever system is distinct from a one-off situation in which a starter is benched in favor of the back-up because the switch is part of the game plan (usually if the starter is playing poorly for that game), and the expectation is that the two players will assume the same roles game after game.\n\nThe third is if a coach decides that the team has two quarterbacks who are equally effective and proceeds to rotate the quarterbacks at predetermined intervals, such as after each quarter or after each series. Southern California high school football team Corona Centennial operated this model during the 2014 football season, rotating quarterbacks after every series. In a game against the Chicago Bears in the seventh week of the 1971 season, Dallas Cowboys head coach Tom Landry alternated Roger Staubach and Craig Morton on each play, sending in the quarterbacks with the play call from the sideline.\n\nThe fourth, still occasionally seen in major-college football, is the use of different quarterbacks in different game or down/distance situations. Generally this involves a running quarterback and a passing quarterback in an option or wishbone offense. In Canadian football, quarterback sneaks or other runs in short-yardage situations tend to be successful as a result of the distance between the offensive and defensive lines being one yard. Drew Tate, a quarterback for the Calgary Stampeders, was primarily used in short-yardage situations and led the CFL in rushing touchdowns during the 2014 season with ten scores as the backup to Bo Levi Mitchell. This strategy had all but disappeared from professional American football, but returned to some extent with the advent of the \"wildcat\" offense. There is a great debate within football circles as to the effectiveness of the so-called \"two-quarterback system\". Many coaches and media personnel remain skeptical of the model. \nTeams such as USC (Southern California), OSU (Oklahoma State), Northwestern, and smaller West Georgia have utilized the two-quarterback system; West Georgia, for example, uses the system due to the skill sets of its quarterbacks. Teams like these use this situation because of the advantages it gives them against defenses of the other team, so that the defense is unable to adjust to their game plan.\n\nThe quarterback position dates to the late 1800s, when American Ivy League schools playing a form of rugby union imported from the United Kingdom began to put their own spin on the game. Walter Camp, a prominent athlete and rugby player at Yale University, pushed through a change in rules at a meeting in 1880 that established a line of scrimmage and allowed for the football to be snapped to a quarterback. The change was meant to allow for teams to strategize their play more thoroughly and retain possession more easily than was possible in the chaos of a scrummage in rugby. In Camp's formulation, the \"quarter-back\" was the person who received a ball snapped back with another player's foot. Originally he was not allowed to run forward of the line of scrimmage:\n\nThe quarterback in this context was often called the \"blocking back\" as their duties usually involved blocking after the initial handoff. The \"fullback\" was the furthest back behind the line of scrimmage. The \"halfback\" was halfway between the fullback and the line of scrimmage, and the \"quarter-back\" was halfway between the halfback and the line of scrimmage. Hence, he was called a \"quarter-back\" by Walter Camp.\n\nThe requirement to stay behind the line of scrimmage was soon rescinded, but it was later re-imposed in six-man football. The exchange between the person snapping the ball (typically the center) and the quarterback was initially an awkward one because it involved a kick. At first, centers gave the ball a small boot, and then picked it up and handed it to the quarterback. By 1889, Yale center Bert Hanson was bouncing the ball on the ground to the quarterback between his legs. The following year, a rule change officially made snapping the ball using the hands between the legs legal. Several years later, Amos Alonzo Stagg at the University of Chicago invented the lift-up snap: the center passed the ball off the ground and between his legs to a standing quarterback. A similar set of changes were later adopted in Canadian football as part of the Burnside rules, a set of rules proposed by John Meldrum \"Thrift\" Burnside, the captain of the University of Toronto's football team.\n\nThe change from a scrummage to a \"scrimmage\" made it easier for teams to decide what plays they would run before the snap. At first, the captains of college teams were put in charge of play-calling, indicating with shouted codes which players would run with the ball and how the men on the line were supposed to block. Yale later used visual signals, including adjustments of the captain's knit hat, to call plays. Centers could also signal plays based on the alignment of the ball before the snap. In 1888, however, Princeton University began to have its quarterback call plays using number signals. That system caught on, and quarterbacks began to act as directors and organizers of offensive play.\n\nEarly on, quarterbacks were used in a variety of formations. Harvard's team put seven men on the line of scrimmage, with three halfbacks who alternated at quarterback and a lone fullback. Princeton put six men on the line and had one designated quarterback, while Yale used seven linemen, one quarterback and two halfbacks who lined up on either side of the fullback. This was the origin of the T-formation, an offensive set that remained in use for many decades afterward and gained popularity in professional football starting in the 1930s.\n\nIn 1906, the forward pass was legalized in American football; Canadian football did not adopt the forward pass until 1929. Despite the legalization of the forward pass, the most popular formations of the early 20th century focused mostly on the rushing game. The single-wing formation, a run-oriented offensive set, was invented by football coach Glenn \"Pop\" Warner around the year 1908. In the single-wing, the quarterback was positioned behind the line of scrimmage and was flanked by a tailback, fullback and wingback. He served largely as a blocking back; the tailback typically took the snap, either running forward with the ball or making a lateral pass to one of the other players in the backfield. The quarterback's job was usually to make blocks upfield to help the tailback or fullback gain yards. Passing plays were rare in the single-wing, an unbalanced power formation where four linemen lined up to one side of the center and two lined up to the other. The tailback was the focus of the offense, and was often a triple-threat man who would either pass, run or kick the ball.\n\nOffensive play-calling continued to focus on rushing up through the 1920s, when professional leagues began to challenge the popularity of college football. In the early days of the professional National Football League (NFL), which was founded in 1920, games were largely low-scoring affairs. Two-thirds of all games in the 1920s were shutouts, and quarterbacks usually passed only out of desperation. In addition to a reluctance to risk turnovers by passing, various rules existed that limited the effectiveness of the forward pass: passers were required to drop back five yards behind the line of scrimmage before they could attempt a pass, and incomplete passes in the end zone resulted in a change of possession and a touchback Additionally, the rules requires the ball to be snapped from the location on the field where it was ruled dead; if a play ended with a player going out of bounds, the center had to snap the ball from the sideline, an awkward place to start a play.\n\nDespite these constraints, player-coach Curly Lambeau of the Green Bay Packers, along with several other NFL figures of his era, was a consistent proponent of the forward pass. The Packers found success in the 1920s and 1930s using variations on the single-wing that emphasized the passing game. Packers quarterback Red Dunn and New York Giants and Brooklyn Dodgers quarterback Benny Friedman were the leading passers of their era, but passing remained a relative rarity among other teams; between 1920 and 1932, there were three times as many running plays as there were passing plays.\n\nEarly NFL quarterbacks typically were responsible for calling the team's offensive plays with signals before the snap. The use of the huddle to call plays originated with Stagg in 1896, but only began to be used regularly in college games in 1921. In the NFL, players were typically assigned numbers, as were the gaps between offensive linemen. One player, usually the quarterback, would call signals indicating which player was to run the ball and which gap he would run toward. Play-calling or any other kind of coaching from the sidelines was not permitted during this period, leaving the quarterback to devise the offensive strategy (often, the quarterback doubled as head coach during this era). Substitutions were limited, and quarterbacks often played on both offense and defense.\n\nThe period between 1933 and 1945 was marked by numerous changes for the quarterback position. The rule requiring a quarterback to be five yards behind the line of scrimmage to pass was abolished. Hash marks were added to the field that established a limited zone between which the ball was placed before snaps, making offensive formations more flexible. Additionally, incomplete passes in the end zone were no longer counted as turnovers and touchbacks.\n\nThe single-wing continued to be in wide use throughout this, and a number of forward-passing tailbacks became stars, including Sammy Baugh of the Washington Redskins. In 1939, University of Chicago head football coach Clark Shaughnessy made modifications to the T-formation, a formation that put the quarterback behind the center and had him receive the snap directly. Shaughnessy altered the formation by having the linemen be spaced further apart, and he began having players go in motion behind the line of scrimmage before the snap to confuse defenses. These changes were picked up by Chicago Bears coach George Halas, a close friend of Shaughnessy, and they quickly caught on in the professional ranks. Utilizing the T-formation and led by quarterback Sid Luckman, the Bears reached the NFL championship game in 1940 and beat the Redskins by a score of 73–0. The blowout led other teams across the league to adopt variations on the T-formation, including the Philadelphia Eagles, Cleveland Rams and Detroit Lions. Baugh and the Redskins converted to the T-formation and continued to succeed.\n\nThanks in part to the emergence of the T-formation and changes in the rulebooks to liberalize the passing game, passing from the quarterback position became more common in the 1940s. Over the course of the decade, passing yards began to exceed rushing yards for the first time in the history of football. The Cleveland Browns of the late 1940s in the All-America Football Conference (AAFC), a professional league created to challenge the NFL, were one of the teams of that era that relied most on passing. Quarterback Otto Graham helped the Browns win four AAFC championships in the late 1940s in head coach Paul Brown's T-formation offense, which emphasized precision timing passes. Cleveland, along with several other AAFC teams, was absorbed by the NFL in 1950 after the dissolution of the AAFC that same year. By the end of the 1940s, all NFL teams aside from the Pittsburgh Steelers used the T-formation as their primary offensive formation.\n\nAs late as the 1960s, running plays occurred more frequently than passes. NFL quarterback Milt Plum later stated that during his career (1957-1969) passes typically only occurred on third downs and sometimes on first downs. Quarterbacks only increased in importance as rules changed to favor passing and higher scoring and as football gained popularity on television after the 1958 NFL Championship Game, often referred to as \"The Greatest Game Ever Played\". Early modern offenses evolved around the quarterback as a passing threat, boosted by rules changes in 1978 and 1979 that made it a penalty for defensive backs to interfere with receivers downfield and allowed offensive linemen to pass-block using their arms and open hands; the rules had limited them to blocking with their hands held to their chests. Average passing yards per game rose from 283.3 in 1977 to 408.7 in 1979.\nThe NFL has continued to be a pass-heavy league to the present day, in part due to further rule changes that prescribed harsher penalties for hitting the quarterback and for hitting defenseless receivers as they awaited passes. Passing in wide-open offenses has also been an emphasis at the high school and college levels, and professional coaches have devised schemes to fit the talents of new generations of quarterbacks.\n\nWhile quarterbacks and team captains usually called plays in football's early years, today coaches often decide which plays the offense will run. Some teams use an offensive coordinator, an assistant coach whose duties include offensive game-planning and often play-calling. In the NFL, coaches are allowed to communicate with quarterbacks and call plays using audio equipment built into the player's helmet. Quarterbacks are allowed to hear, but not talk to, their coaches until there are fifteen seconds left on the play clock. Once the quarterback receives the call, he may relay it to other players via signals or in a huddle.\n\nDallas Cowboys head coach Tom Landry was an early advocate of taking play calling out of the quarterback's hands. Although this remained a common practice in the NFL through the 1970s, fewer QBs were doing it by the 1980s and even Hall of Famers like Joe Montana did not call their own plays. Buffalo Bills QB Jim Kelly was one of the last to regularly call plays. Peyton Manning, formerly of the Indianapolis Colts and Denver Broncos, was the best modern example of a quarterback who called his own plays, primary using an uptempo, no-huddle-based attack. Manning had almost complete control over the offense. Baltimore Ravens quarterback Joe Flacco retains a high degree of control over the offense as well, particularly when running a no-huddle scheme, as does Ben Roethlisberger of the Pittsburgh Steelers.\n\nIn the present day NFL, Tom Brady -the QB for the New England Patriots, is widely considered to be the most decorated and highest achieving QB in NFL history. Tom Brady, who will be starting his 17th NFL season in the Fall of 2017, is a 12 time pro-bowler, 5 time Superbowl winner and a 4 time Superbowl MVP.\n\nDuring the 2013 season, 67 percent of NFL players were African American (blacks make up 13 percent of the US population), yet only 17 percent of quarterbacks were; 82 percent of quarterbacks were white. Samuel G. Freedman, writing in \"The New Yorker\", asserted that black quarterbacks have faced discrimination, \"often denied the starting positions they deserved.\"\n\nSince the inception of the game, only two black quarterbacks have led their team to a Super Bowl victory, Doug Williams in 1988 and Russell Wilson in 2014.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "25278", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25278", "title": "Quadrilateral", "text": "Quadrilateral\n\nIn Euclidean plane geometry, a quadrilateral is a polygon with four edges (or sides) and four vertices or corners. Sometimes, the term quadrangle is used, by analogy with triangle, and sometimes tetragon for consistency with pentagon (5-sided), hexagon (6-sided) and so on.\n\nThe origin of the word \"quadrilateral\" is the two Latin words \"quadri\", a variant of four, and \"latus\", meaning \"side\".\n\nQuadrilaterals are simple (not self-intersecting) or complex (self-intersecting), also called crossed. Simple quadrilaterals are either convex or concave.\n\nThe interior angles of a simple (and planar) quadrilateral \"ABCD\" add up to 360 degrees of arc, that is\n\nThis is a special case of the \"n\"-gon interior angle sum formula (\"n\" − 2) × 180°.\n\nAll non-self-crossing quadrilaterals tile the plane by repeated rotation around the midpoints of their edges.\n\nAny quadrilateral that is not self-intersecting is a simple quadrilateral.\n\nIn a convex quadrilateral, all interior angles are less than 180° and the two diagonals both lie inside the quadrilateral.\n\n\n\nIn a concave quadrilateral, one interior angle is bigger than 180° and one of the two diagonals lies outside the quadrilateral.\n\nA self-intersecting quadrilateral is called variously a cross-quadrilateral, crossed quadrilateral, butterfly quadrilateral or bow-tie quadrilateral. In a crossed quadrilateral, the four \"interior\" angles on either side of the crossing (two acute and two reflex, all on the left or all on the right as the figure is traced out) add up to 720°.\n\n\nThe two diagonals of a convex quadrilateral are the line segments that connect opposite vertices.\n\nThe two bimedians of a convex quadrilateral are the line segments that connect the midpoints of opposite sides. They intersect at the \"vertex centroid\" of the quadrilateral (see Remarkable points below).\n\nThe four maltitudes of a convex quadrilateral are the perpendiculars to a side through the midpoint of the opposite side.\n\nThere are various general formulas for the area \"K\" of a convex quadrilateral \"ABCD\" with sides .\n\nThe area can be expressed in trigonometric terms as\n\nwhere the lengths of the diagonals are \"p\" and \"q\" and the angle between them is \"θ\". In the case of an orthodiagonal quadrilateral (e.g. rhombus, square, and kite), this formula reduces to formula_3 since \"θ\" is 90°.\n\nThe area can be also expressed in terms of bimedians as\nwhere the lengths of the bimedians are \"m\" and \"n\" and the angle between them is \"φ\".\n\nBretschneider's formula expresses the area in terms of the sides and two opposite angles:\n\nwhere the sides in sequence are \"a\", \"b\", \"c\", \"d\", where \"s\" is the semiperimeter, and \"A\" and \"C\" are two (in fact, any two) opposite angles. This reduces to Brahmagupta's formula for the area of a cyclic quadrilateral when .\n\nAnother area formula in terms of the sides and angles, with angle \"C\" being between sides \"b\" and \"c\", and \"A\" being between sides \"a\" and \"d\", is\n\nIn the case of a cyclic quadrilateral, the latter formula becomes formula_7\n\nIn a parallelogram, where both pairs of opposite sides and angles are equal, this formula reduces to formula_8\n\nAlternatively, we can write the area in terms of the sides and the intersection angle \"θ\" of the diagonals, so long as this angle is not 90°:\n\nIn the case of a parallelogram, the latter formula becomes formula_10\n\nAnother area formula including the sides \"a\", \"b\", \"c\", \"d\" is\nwhere \"x\" is the distance between the midpoints of the diagonals and \"φ\" is the angle between the bimedians.\n\nThe last trigonometric area formula including the sides \"a\", \"b\", \"c\", \"d\" and the angle \"α\" between \"a\" and \"b\" is: \nwhich can also be used for the area of a concave quadrilateral (having the concave part opposite to angle \"α\") just changing the first sign + to - .\n\nThe following two formulas express the area in terms of the sides \"a\", \"b\", \"c\", \"d\", the semiperimeter \"s\", and the diagonals \"p\", \"q\":\n\nThe first reduces to Brahmagupta's formula in the cyclic quadrilateral case, since then \"pq\" = \"ac\" + \"bd\".\n\nThe area can also be expressed in terms of the bimedians \"m\", \"n\" and the diagonals \"p\", \"q\":\n\nIn fact, any three of the four values \"m\", \"n\", \"p\", and \"q\" suffice for determination of the area, since in any quadrilateral the four values are related by formula_17 The corresponding expressions are:\n\nif the lengths of two bimedians and one diagonal are given, and\n\nif the lengths of two diagonals and one bimedian are given.\n\nThe area of a quadrilateral \"ABCD\" can be calculated using vectors. Let vectors AC and BD form the diagonals from \"A\" to \"C\" and from \"B\" to \"D\". The area of the quadrilateral is then\n\nwhich is half the magnitude of the cross product of vectors AC and BD. In two-dimensional Euclidean space, expressing vector AC as a free vector in Cartesian space equal to (x\",\"y\") and BD as (x\",\"y\"), this can be rewritten as:\n\nIn the following table it is listed if the diagonals in some of the most basic quadrilaterals bisect each other, if their diagonals are perpendicular, and if their diagonals have equal length. The list applies to the most general cases, and excludes named subsets.\n\n\"Note 1: The most general trapezoids and isosceles trapezoids do not have perpendicular diagonals, but there are infinite numbers of (non-similar) trapezoids and isosceles trapezoids that do have perpendicular diagonals and are not any other named quadrilateral.\"\n\n\"Note 2: In a kite, one diagonal bisects the other. The most general kite has unequal diagonals, but there is an infinite number of (non-similar) kites in which the diagonals are equal in length (and the kites are not any other named quadrilateral).\"\n\nThe lengths of the diagonals in a convex quadrilateral \"ABCD\" can be calculated using the law of cosines on each triangle formed by one diagonal and two sides of the quadrilateral. Thus\n\nand\n\nOther, more symmetric formulas for the lengths of the diagonals, are\n\nand\n\nIn any convex quadrilateral \"ABCD\", the sum of the squares of the four sides is equal to the sum of the squares of the two diagonals plus four times the square of the line segment connecting the midpoints of the diagonals. Thus\n\nwhere \"x\" is the distance between the midpoints of the diagonals. This is sometimes known as Euler's quadrilateral theorem and is a generalization of the parallelogram law.\n\nThe German mathematician Carl Anton Bretschneider derived in 1842 the following generalization of Ptolemy's theorem, regarding the product of the diagonals in a convex quadrilateral\n\nThis relation can be considered to be a law of cosines for a quadrilateral. In a cyclic quadrilateral, where \"A\" + \"C\" = 180°, it reduces to \"pq = ac + bd\". Since cos (\"A\" + \"C\") ≥ −1, it also gives a proof of Ptolemy's inequality.\n\nIf \"X\" and \"Y\" are the feet of the normals from \"B\" and \"D\" to the diagonal \"AC\" = \"p\" in a convex quadrilateral \"ABCD\" with sides \"a\" = \"AB\", \"b\" = \"BC\", \"c\" = \"CD\", \"d\" = \"DA\", then\n\nIn a convex quadrilateral \"ABCD\" with sides \"a\" = \"AB\", \"b\" = \"BC\", \"c\" = \"CD\", \"d\" = \"DA\", and where the diagonals intersect at \"E\",\n\nwhere \"e\" = \"AE\", \"f\" = \"BE\", \"g\" = \"CE\", and \"h\" = \"DE\".\n\nThe shape and size of a convex quadrilateral are fully determined by the lengths of its sides in sequence and of one diagonal between two specified vertices. The two diagonals \"p, q\" and the four side lengths \"a, b, c, d\" of a quadrilateral are related by the Cayley-Menger determinant, as follows:\n\nThe internal angle bisectors of a convex quadrilateral either form a cyclic quadrilateral (that is, the four intersection points of adjacent angle bisectors are concyclic) or they are concurrent. In the latter case the quadrilateral is a tangential quadrilateral.\n\nIn quadrilateral \"ABCD\", if the angle bisectors of \"A\" and \"C\" meet on diagonal \"BD\", then the angle bisectors of \"B\" and \"D\" meet on diagonal \"AC\".\n\nThe bimedians of a quadrilateral are the line segments connecting the midpoints of the opposite sides. The intersection of the bimedians is the centroid of the vertices of the quadrilateral.\n\nThe midpoints of the sides of any quadrilateral (convex, concave or crossed) are the vertices of a parallelogram called the Varignon parallelogram. It has the following properties:\n\nThe two bimedians in a quadrilateral and the line segment joining the midpoints of the diagonals in that quadrilateral are concurrent and are all bisected by their point of intersection.\n\nIn a convex quadrilateral with sides \"a\", \"b\", \"c\" and \"d\", the length of the bimedian that connects the midpoints of the sides \"a\" and \"c\" is\n\nwhere \"p\" and \"q\" are the length of the diagonals. The length of the bimedian that connects the midpoints of the sides \"b\" and \"d\" is\n\nHence\n\nThis is also a corollary to the parallelogram law applied in the Varignon parallelogram.\n\nThe lengths of the bimedians can also be expressed in terms of two opposite sides and the distance \"x\" between the midpoints of the diagonals. This is possible when using Euler's quadrilateral theorem in the above formulas. Whence\n\nand\n\nNote that the two opposite sides in these formulas are not the two that the bimedian connects.\n\nIn a convex quadrilateral, there is the following dual connection between the bimedians and the diagonals:\n\nThe four angles of a simple quadrilateral \"ABCD\" satisfy the following identities:\n\nand\n\nAlso,\n\nIn the last two formulas, no angle is allowed to be a right angle, since tan 90° is not defined.\n\nIf a convex quadrilateral has the consecutive sides \"a\", \"b\", \"c\", \"d\" and the diagonals \"p\", \"q\", then its area \"K\" satisfies\n\nFrom Bretschneider's formula it directly follows that the area of a quadrilateral satisfies\n\nwith equality if and only if the quadrilateral is cyclic or degenerate such that one side is equal to the sum of the other three (it has collapsed into a line segment, so the area is zero).\n\nThe area of any quadrilateral also satisfies the inequality\n\nDenoting the perimeter as \"L\", we have\n\nwith equality only in the case of a square.\n\nThe area of a convex quadrilateral also satisfies\n\nfor diagonal lengths \"p\" and \"q\", with equality if and only if the diagonals are perpendicular.\n\nA corollary to Euler's quadrilateral theorem is the inequality\n\nwhere equality holds if and only if the quadrilateral is a parallelogram.\n\nEuler also generalized Ptolemy's theorem, which is an equality in a cyclic quadrilateral, into an inequality for a convex quadrilateral. It states that\n\nwhere there is equality if and only if the quadrilateral is cyclic. This is often called Ptolemy's inequality.\n\nIn any convex quadrilateral the bimedians \"m, n\" and the diagonals \"p, q\" are related by the inequality\n\nwith equality holding if and only if the diagonals are equal. This follows directly from the quadrilateral identity formula_50\n\nThe sides \"a\", \"b\", \"c\", and \"d\" of any quadrilateral satisfy\n\nand\n\nAmong all quadrilaterals with a given perimeter, the one with the largest area is the square. This is called the \"isoperimetric theorem for quadrilaterals\". It is a direct consequence of the area inequality\n\nwhere \"K\" is the area of a convex quadrilateral with perimeter \"L\". Equality holds if and only if the quadrilateral is a square. The dual theorem states that of all quadrilaterals with a given area, the square has the shortest perimeter.\n\nThe quadrilateral with given side lengths that has the maximum area is the cyclic quadrilateral.\n\nOf all convex quadrilaterals with given diagonals, the orthodiagonal quadrilateral has the largest area. This is a direct consequence of the fact that the area of a convex quadrilateral satisfies\n\nwhere \"θ\" is the angle between the diagonals \"p\" and \"q\". Equality holds if and only if \"θ\" = 90°.\n\nIf \"P\" is an interior point in a convex quadrilateral \"ABCD\", then\n\nFrom this inequality it follows that the point inside a quadrilateral that minimizes the sum of distances to the vertices is the intersection of the diagonals. Hence that point is the Fermat point of a convex quadrilateral.\n\nThe centre of a quadrilateral can be defined in several different ways. The \"vertex centroid\" comes from considering the quadrilateral as being empty but having equal masses at its vertices. The \"side centroid\" comes from considering the sides to have constant mass per unit length. The usual centre, called just centroid (centre of area) comes from considering the surface of the quadrilateral as having constant density. These three points are in general not all the same point.\n\nThe \"vertex centroid\" is the intersection of the two bimedians. As with any polygon, the \"x\" and \"y\" coordinates of the vertex centroid are the arithmetic means of the \"x\" and \"y\" coordinates of the vertices.\n\nThe \"area centroid\" of quadrilateral \"ABCD\" can be constructed in the following way. Let \"G\", \"G\", \"G\", \"G\" be the centroids of triangles \"BCD\", \"ACD\", \"ABD\", \"ABC\" respectively. Then the \"area centroid\" is the intersection of the lines \"GG\" and \"GG\".\n\nIn a general convex quadrilateral \"ABCD\", there are no natural analogies to the circumcenter and orthocenter of a triangle. But two such points can be constructed in the following way. Let \"O\", \"O\", \"O\", \"O\" be the circumcenters of triangles \"BCD\", \"ACD\", \"ABD\", \"ABC\" respectively; and denote by \"H\", \"H\", \"H\", \"H\" the orthocenters in the same triangles. Then the intersection of the lines \"OO\" and \"OO\" is called the quasicircumcenter, and the intersection of the lines \"HH\" and \"HH\" is called the \"quasiorthocenter\" of the convex quadrilateral. These points can be used to define an Euler line of a quadrilateral. In a convex quadrilateral, the quasiorthocenter \"H\", the \"area centroid\" \"G\", and the quasicircumcenter \"O\" are collinear in this order, and \"HG\" = 2\"GO\".\n\nThere can also be defined a \"quasinine-point center\" \"E\" as the intersection of the lines \"EE\" and \"EE\", where \"E\", \"E\", \"E\", \"E\" are the nine-point centers of triangles \"BCD\", \"ACD\", \"ABD\", \"ABC\" respectively. Then \"E\" is the midpoint of \"OH\".\n\nAnother remarkable line in a convex non-parallelogram quadrilateral is the Newton line, which connects the midpoints of the diagonals, the segment connecting these points being bisected by the vertex centroid. One more interesting line (in some sense dual to the Newton's one) is the line connecting the point of intersection of diagonals with the vertex centroid. The line is remarkable by the fact that it contains the (area) centroid. The vertex centroid divides the segment connecting the intersection of diagonals and the (area) centroid in the ratio 3:1.\n\n\nA hierarchical taxonomy of quadrilaterals is illustrated by the figure to the right. Lower classes are special cases of higher classes they are connected to. Note that \"trapezoid\" here is referring to the North American definition (the British equivalent is a trapezium). Inclusive definitions are used throughout.\n\nA non-planar quadrilateral is called a skew quadrilateral. Formulas to compute its dihedral angles from the edge lengths and the angle between two adjacent edges were derived for work on the properties of molecules such as cyclobutane that contain a \"puckered\" ring of four atoms. Historically the term gauche quadrilateral was also used to mean a skew quadrilateral. A skew quadrilateral together with its diagonals form a (possibly non-regular) tetrahedron, and conversely every skew quadrilateral comes from a tetrahedron where a pair of opposite edges is removed.\n\n"}
{"id": "25280", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25280", "title": "Quantum teleportation", "text": "Quantum teleportation\n\nQuantum teleportation is a process by which quantum information (e.g. the exact state of an atom or photon) can be transmitted (exactly, in principle) from one location to another, with the help of classical communication and previously shared quantum entanglement between the sending and receiving location. Because it depends on classical communication, which can proceed no faster than the speed of light, it cannot currently be used for faster-than-light transport or communication of classical bits. While it has proven possible to teleport one or more qubits of information between two (entangled) atoms, this has not yet been achieved between molecules or anything larger.\n\nAlthough the name is inspired by the teleportation commonly used in fiction, there is no relationship outside the name, because quantum teleportation concerns only the transfer of information. Quantum teleportation is not a form of transport, but of communication; it provides a way of transporting a qubit from one location to another, without having to move a physical particle along with it.\n\nThe seminal paper first expounding the idea of quantum teleportation was published by C. H. Bennett, G. Brassard, C. Crépeau, R. Jozsa, A. Peres and W. K. Wootters in 1993. Since then, quantum teleportation was first realized with single photons and later demonstrated with various material systems such as atoms, ions, electrons and superconducting circuits. The reported record distance for quantum teleportation is .\n\nIn October 2015, scientists from the Kavli Institute of Nanoscience of the Delft University of Technology reported that the quantum nonlocality phenomenon is supported at the 96% confidence level based on a \"loophole-free Bell test\" study. These results were confirmed by two studies with statistical significance over 5 standard deviations which were published in December 2015.\n\nIn matters relating to quantum or classical information theory, it is convenient to work with the simplest possible unit of information, the two-state system. In classical information this is a bit, commonly represented using one or zero (or true or false). The quantum analog of a bit is a quantum bit, or qubit. Qubits encode a type of information, called quantum information, which differs sharply from \"classical\" information. For example, quantum information can be neither copied (the no-cloning theorem) nor destroyed (the no-deleting theorem).\n\nQuantum teleportation provides a mechanism of moving a qubit from one location to another, without having to physically transport the underlying particle that a qubit is normally attached to. Much like the invention of the telegraph allowed classical bits to be transported at high speed across continents, quantum teleportation holds the promise that one day, qubits could be moved likewise. However, , only photons and single atoms have been employed as information bearers.\n\nThe movement of qubits does require the movement of \"things\"; in particular, the actual teleportation protocol requires that an entangled quantum state or Bell state be created, and its two parts shared between two locations (the source and destination, or Alice and Bob). In essence, a certain kind of \"quantum channel\" between two sites must be established first, before a qubit can be moved. Teleportation also requires a classical information link to be established, as two classical bits must be transmitted to accompany each qubit. The reason for this is that the results of the measurements must be communicated, and this must be done over ordinary classical communication channels. The need for such links may, at first, seem disappointing; however, this is not unlike ordinary communications, which requires wires, radios or lasers. What's more, Bell states are most easily shared using photons from lasers, and so teleportation could be done, in principle, through open space.\n\nThe quantum states of single atoms have been teleported. An atom consists of several parts: the qubits in the electronic state or electron shells surrounding the atomic nucleus, the qubits in the nucleus itself, and, finally, the electrons, protons and neutrons making up the atom. Physicists have teleported the qubits encoded in the electronic state of atoms; they have not teleported the nuclear state, nor the nucleus itself. It is therefore false to say \"an atom has been teleported\". It has not. The quantum state of an atom has. Thus, performing this kind of teleportation requires a stock of atoms at the receiving site, available for having qubits imprinted on them. The importance of teleporting nuclear state is unclear: nuclear state does affect the atom, e.g. in hyperfine splitting, but whether such state would need to be teleported in some futuristic \"practical\" application is debatable.\n\nAn important aspect of quantum information theory is entanglement, which imposes statistical correlations between otherwise distinct physical systems. These correlations hold even when measurements are chosen and performed independently, out of causal contact from one another, as verified in Bell test experiments. Thus, an observation resulting from a measurement choice made at one point in spacetime seems to instantaneously affect outcomes in another region, even though light hasn't yet had time to travel the distance; a conclusion seemingly at odds with Special relativity (EPR paradox). However such correlations can never be used to transmit any information faster than the speed of light, a statement encapsulated in the no-communication theorem. Thus, teleportation, as a whole, can never be superluminal, as a qubit cannot be reconstructed until the accompanying classical information arrives.\n\nUnderstanding quantum teleportation requires a good grounding in finite-dimensional linear algebra, Hilbert spaces and projection matrixes. A qubit is described using a two-dimensional complex number-valued vector space (a Hilbert space), which are the primary basis for the formal manipulations given below. A working knowledge of quantum mechanics is not absolutely required to understand the mathematics of quantum teleportation, although without such acquaintance, the deeper meaning of the equations may remain quite mysterious.\n\nThe prerequisites for quantum teleportation are a qubit that is to be teleported, a conventional communication channel capable of transmitting two classical bits (i.e., one of four states), and means of generating an entangled EPR pair of qubits, transporting each of these to two different locations, A and B, performing a Bell measurement on one of the EPR pair qubits, and manipulating the quantum state of the other of the pair. The protocol is then as follows:\n\n\nWork in 1998 verified the initial predictions, and the distance of teleportation was increased in August 2004 to 600 meters, using optical fiber. Subsequently, the record distance for quantum teleportation has been gradually increased to 16 km, then to 97 km, and is now , set in open air experiments done between two of the Canary Islands. There has been a recent record set (as of September 2015) using superconducting nanowire detectors that reached the distance of over optical fiber. For material systems, the record distance is 21m.\n\nA variant of teleportation called \"open-destination\" teleportation, with receivers located at multiple locations, was demonstrated in 2004 using five-photon entanglement. Teleportation of a composite state of two single photons has also been realized. In April 2011, experimenters reported that they had demonstrated teleportation of wave packets of light up to a bandwidth of 10 MHz while preserving strongly nonclassical superposition states. In August 2013, the achievement of \"fully deterministic\" quantum teleportation, using a hybrid technique, was reported. On 29 May 2014, scientists announced a reliable way of transferring data by quantum teleportation. Quantum teleportation of data had been done before but with highly unreliable methods. On 26 February 2015, scientists at the University of Science and Technology of China in Hefei, led by Chao-yang Lu and Jian-Wei Pan carried out the first experiment teleporting multiple degrees of freedom of a quantum particle. They managed to teleport the quantum information from ensemble of rubidium atoms to another ensemble of rubidium atoms over a distance of 150 metres using entangled photons\n\nResearchers have also successfully used quantum teleportation to transmit information between clouds of gas atoms, notable because the clouds of gas are macroscopic atomic ensembles.\n\nThere are a variety of ways in which the teleportation protocol can be written mathematically. Some are very compact but abstract, and some are verbose but straightforward and concrete. The presentation below is of the latter form: verbose, but has the benefit of showing each quantum state simply and directly. Later sections review more compact notations.\n\nThe teleportation protocol begins with a quantum state or qubit formula_4, in Alice's possession, that she wants to convey to Bob. This qubit can be written generally, in bra–ket notation, as:\n\nThe subscript \"C\" above is used only to distinguish this state from \"A\" and \"B\", below.\n\nNext, the protocol requires that Alice and Bob share a maximally entangled state. This state is fixed in advance, by mutual agreement between Alice and Bob, and can be any one of the four Bell states shown. It does not matter which one.\n\nIn the following, assume that Alice and Bob share the state formula_10\nAlice obtains one of the particles in the pair, with the other going to Bob. (This is implemented by preparing the particles together and shooting them to Alice and Bob from a common source.) The subscripts \"A\" and \"B\" in the entangled state refer to Alice's or Bob's particle.\n\nAt this point, Alice has two particles (\"C\", the one she wants to teleport, and \"A\", one of the entangled pair), and Bob has one particle, \"B\". In the total system, the state of these three particles is given by\n\nAlice will then make a local measurement in the Bell basis (i.e. the four Bell states) on the two particles in her possession. To make the result of her measurement clear, it is best to write the state of Alice's two qubits as superpositions of the Bell basis. This is done by using the following general identities, which are easily verified:\n\nand\n\nOne applies these identities with \"A\" and \"C\" subscripts. The total three particle state, of \"A\", \"B\" and \"C\" together, thus becomes the following four-term superposition:\n\nThe above is just a change of basis on Alice's part of the system. No operation has been performed and the three particles are still in the same total state. The actual teleportation occurs when Alice measures her two qubits A,C, in the Bell basis\n\nExperimentally, this measurement may be achieved via a series of laser pulses directed at the two particles. Given the above expression, evidently the result of Alice's (local) measurement is that the three-particle state would collapse to one of the following four states (with equal probability of obtaining each):\n\n\nAlice's two particles are now entangled to each other, in one of the four Bell states, and the entanglement originally shared between Alice's and Bob's particles is now broken. Bob's particle takes on one of the four superposition states shown above. Note how Bob's qubit is now in a state that resembles the state to be teleported. The four possible states for Bob's qubit are unitary images of the state to be teleported.\n\nThe result of Alice's Bell measurement tells her which of the above four states the system is in. She can now send her result to Bob through a classical channel. Two classical bits can communicate which of the four results she obtained.\n\nAfter Bob receives the message from Alice, he will know which of the four states his particle is in. Using this information, he performs a unitary operation on his particle to transform it to the desired state formula_22:\n\n\nto recover the state.\n\n\nto his qubit.\n\n\nTeleportation is thus achieved. The above-mentioned three gates correspond to rotations of π radians (180°) about appropriate axes (X, Y and Z).\n\nSome remarks:\n\n\nThere are a variety of different notations in use that describe the teleportation protocol. One common one is by using the notation of quantum gates. In the above derivation, the unitary transformation that is the change of basis (from the standard product basis into the Bell basis) can be written using quantum gates. Direct calculation shows that this gate is given by\n\nwhere \"H\" is the one qubit Walsh-Hadamard gate and formula_31 is the Controlled NOT gate.\n\nTeleportation can be applied not just to pure states, but also mixed states, that can be regarded as the state of a single subsystem of an entangled pair. The so-called entanglement swapping is a simple and illustrative example.\n\nIf Alice has a particle which is entangled with a particle owned by Bob, and Bob teleports it to Carol, then afterwards, Alice's particle is entangled with Carol's.\n\nA more symmetric way to describe the situation is the following: Alice has one particle, Bob two, and Carol one. Alice's particle and Bob's first particle are entangled, and so are Bob's second and Carol's particle:\n\nNow, if Bob does a projective measurement on his two particles in the Bell state basis and communicates the results to Carol, as per the teleportation scheme described above, the state of Bob's first particle can be teleported to Carol's. Although Alice and Carol never interacted with each other, their particles are now entangled.\n\nA detailed diagrammatic derivation of entanglement swapping has been given by Bob Coecke, presented in terms of categorical quantum mechanics.\n\nOne can imagine how the teleportation scheme given above might be extended to \"N\"-state particles, i.e. particles whose states lie in the \"N\" dimensional Hilbert space. The combined system of the three particles now has an formula_32 dimensional state space. To teleport, Alice makes a partial measurement on the two particles in her possession in some entangled basis on the formula_33 dimensional subsystem. This measurement has formula_33 equally probable outcomes, which are then communicated to Bob classically. Bob recovers the desired state by sending his particle through an appropriate unitary gate.\n\nIn general, mixed states ρ may be transported, and a linear transformation ω applied during teleportation, thus allowing data processing of quantum information. This is one of the foundational building blocks of quantum information processing. This is demonstrated below.\n\nA general teleportation scheme can be described as follows. Three quantum systems are involved. System 1 is the (unknown) state \"ρ\" to be teleported by Alice. Systems 2 and 3 are in a maximally entangled state \"ω\" that are distributed to Alice and Bob, respectively. The total system is then in the state\n\nA successful teleportation process is a LOCC quantum channel Φ that satisfies\n\nwhere Tr is the partial trace operation with respect systems 1 and 2, and formula_37 denotes the composition of maps. This describes the channel in the Schrödinger picture.\n\nTaking adjoint maps in the Heisenberg picture, the success condition becomes\n\nfor all observable \"O\" on Bob's system. The tensor factor in formula_39 is formula_40 while that of formula_41 is formula_42.\n\nThe proposed channel Φ can be described more explicitly. To begin teleportation, Alice performs a local measurement on the two subsystems (1 and 2) in her possession. Assume the local measurement have \"effects\"\n\nIf the measurement registers the \"i\"-th outcome, the overall state collapses to\n\nThe tensor factor in formula_45 is formula_40 while that of formula_41 is formula_42. Bob then applies a corresponding local operation Ψ\"\" on system 3. On the combined system, this is described by\n\nwhere \"Id\" is the identity map on the composite system formula_50.\n\nTherefore, the channel Φ is defined by\n\nNotice Φ satisfies the definition of LOCC. As stated above, the teleportation is said to be successful if, for all observable \"O\" on Bob's system, the equality\n\nholds. The left hand side of the equation is:\n\nwhere Ψ\"*\" is the adjoint of Ψ\"\" in the Heisenberg picture. Assuming all objects are finite dimensional, this becomes\n\nThe success criterion for teleportation has the expression\n\nA local explanation of quantum teleportation is put forward by David Deutsch and Patrick Hayden, with respect to the many-worlds interpretation of Quantum mechanics. Their paper asserts that the two bits that Alice sends Bob contain \"locally inaccessible information\" resulting in the teleportation of the quantum state. \"The ability of quantum information to flow through a classical channel ..., surviving decoherence, is ... the\nbasis of quantum teleportation.\"\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "25284", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25284", "title": "Qubit", "text": "Qubit\n\nIn quantum computing, a qubit () or quantum bit (sometimes qbit) is a unit of quantum information—the quantum analogue of the classical bit. A qubit is a two-state quantum-mechanical system, such as the polarization of a single photon: here the two states are vertical polarization and horizontal polarization.  In a classical system, a bit would have to be in one state or the other. However, quantum mechanics allows the qubit to be in a superposition of both states at the same time, a property that is fundamental to quantum computing.\n\nThe coining of the term \"qubit\" is attributed to Benjamin Schumacher. In the acknowledgments of his paper, Schumacher states that the term \"qubit\" was invented in jest, during a conversation with William Wootters. The paper describes a way of compressing states emitted by a quantum source of information so that they require fewer physical resources to store. This procedure is now known as Schumacher compression.\n\nThe bit is the basic unit of information. It is used to represent information by computers. Regardless of its physical realization, a bit has two possible states typically thought of as 0 and 1, but more generally—and according to applications—interpretable as true and false, or any other dichotomous choice. An analogy to this is a light switch—its OFF position can be thought of as 0 and its ON position as 1.\n\nA qubit has a few similarities to a classical bit, but is overall very different. There are two possible outcomes for the measurement of a qubit—usually 0 and 1, like a bit. The difference is that whereas the state of a bit is either 0 or 1, the state of a qubit can also be a superposition of both. It is possible to fully encode one bit in one qubit. However, a qubit can hold even more information, e.g. up to two bits using superdense coding.\n\nFor a system of \"n\" components, a complete description of its state in classical physics requires only \"n\" bits, whereas in quantum physics it requires 2−1 complex numbers.\n\nThe two states in which a qubit may be measured are known as basis states (or basis vectors). As is the tradition with any sort of quantum states, they are represented by Dirac—or \"bra–ket\"—notation. This means that the two computational basis states are conventionally written as formula_1 and formula_2 (pronounced \"ket 0\" and \"ket 1\").\n\nA pure qubit state is a linear superposition of the basis states. This means that the qubit can be represented as a linear combination of formula_3 and formula_4 :\n\nwhere α and β are probability amplitudes and can in general both be complex numbers.\n\nWhen we measure this qubit in the standard basis, the probability of outcome formula_3 is formula_7 and the probability of outcome formula_4 is formula_9. Because the absolute squares of the amplitudes equate to probabilities, it follows that formula_10 and formula_11 must be constrained by the equation\n\nIt might, at first sight, seem that there should be four degrees of freedom, as formula_10 and formula_11 are complex numbers with two degrees of freedom each. However, one degree of freedom is removed by the normalization constraint , which can be treated as the equation for a 3-sphere embedded in 4-dimensional space with a radius of (unit sphere). This means, with a suitable change of coordinates, one can eliminate one of the degrees of freedom. One possible choice is that of Hopf coordinates:\nAdditionally, for a single qubit the overall phase of the state has no physically observable consequences, so we can arbitrarily choose to be real (or in the case that is zero), leaving just two degrees of freedom:\nThe possible states for a single qubit can be visualised using a Bloch sphere (see diagram). Represented on such a sphere, a classical bit could only be at the \"North Pole\" or the \"South Pole\", in the locations where formula_3 and formula_4 are respectively. The rest of the surface of the sphere is inaccessible to a classical bit, but a pure qubit state can be represented by any point on the surface. For example, the pure qubit state <math>\n\nIn a paper entitled: \"Solid-state quantum memory using the P nuclear spin\", published in the October 23, 2008 issue of the journal \"Nature\", a team of scientists from the U.K. and U.S. reported the first relatively long (1.75 seconds) and coherent transfer of a superposition state in an electron spin \"processing\" qubit to a nuclear spin \"memory\" qubit. This event can be considered the first relatively consistent quantum data storage, a vital step towards the development of quantum computing. Recently, a modification of similar systems (using charged rather than neutral donors) has dramatically extended this time, to 3 hours at very low temperatures and 39 minutes at room temperature. Room temperature preparation of a qubit based on electron spins instead of nuclear spin was also demonstrated by a team of scientists from Switzerland and Australia.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "25286", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25286", "title": "Quechuan languages", "text": "Quechuan languages\n\nQuechua , also known as runa simi (\"people's language\"), is an indigenous language family, with variations spoken by the Quechua peoples, primarily living in the Andes and highlands of South America. Derived from a common ancestral language, it is the most widely spoken language family of indigenous peoples of the Americas, with a total of probably some 8–10 million speakers. Approximately 13% of Peruvians speak Quechua. It is perhaps most widely known for being the main language of the Inca Empire, and was disseminated by the colonizers throughout their reign.\n\nQuechua had already expanded across wide ranges of the central Andes long before the expansion of the Inca Empire. The Inca were one among many peoples in present-day Peru who already spoke forms of Quechua. In the Cusco region, Quechua was influenced by local languages such as Aymara. The Cuzco variety of Quechua developed as quite distinct. In similar ways, diverse dialects developed in different areas, related to existing local languages, when the Inca Empire ruled and imposed Quechua as the official language.\n\nAfter the Spanish conquest of the Inca Empire in the 16th century, Quechua continued to be used widely by the indigenous peoples as the \"common language.\" It was officially recognized by the Spanish administration and many Spanish learned it in order to communicate with the local peoples. Clergy of the Catholic Church adopted Quechua to use as the language of evangelization. Given its use by the Catholic missionaries, the range of Quechua continued to expand in some areas.\n\nIn the late 18th century, colonial officials ended administrative and religious use of Quechua, banning it from public use in Peru after the Túpac Amaru II rebellion of indigenous peoples. The Crown banned even \"loyal\" pro-Catholic texts in Quechua, such as Garcilaso de la Vega's \"Comentarios Reales.\"\n\nDespite a brief revival of the language immediately after the Latin American nations achieved independence in the 19th century, the prestige of Quechua had decreased sharply. Gradually its use declined so that it was spoken mostly by indigenous people in the more isolated and conservative rural areas. Nevertheless in the 21st century, those speaking Quechua language speakers number 8 to 10 million people across South America, the most speakers of any indigenous language.\n\nThe oldest written records of the language are by missionary Domingo de Santo Tomás, who arrived in Peru in 1538 and learned the language from 1540. He published his \"Grammatica o arte de la lengua general de los indios de los reynos del Perú\" (Grammar or Art of the General Language of the Indians of the Royalty of Peru) in 1560.\n\nIn 1975 Peru became the first country to recognize Quechua as one of its official languages. Ecuador conferred official status on the language in its 2006 constitution, and in 2009, Bolivia adopted a new constitution that recognized Quechua and several other indigenous languages as official languages of the country.\n\nThe major obstacle to the usage and teaching of Quechua is the lack of written materials in that language, such as books, newspapers, software, and magazines. The Bible has been translated into Quechua and is distributed by certain missionary groups. Quechua, along with Aymara and the minor indigenous languages, remains essentially a spoken language.\n\nIn recent years, Quechua has been introduced in intercultural bilingual education (IBE) in Bolivia, Ecuador and Peru. Even in these areas, the governments are reaching only a part of the Quechua-speaking populations. Some indigenous people in each of the countries are having their children study in Spanish for the purposes of social advancement.\n\nRadio Nacional del Perú broadcasts news and agrarian programs in Quechua for periods in the mornings.\n\nQuechua and Spanish are now heavily intermixed in much of the Andean region, with many hundreds of Spanish loanwords in Quechua. Conversely, Quechua phrases and words are commonly used by Spanish speakers. In southern rural Bolivia, for instance, many Quechua words such as \"wawa\" (infant), \"misi\" (cat), \"waska\" (strap or thrashing), are as commonly used as their Spanish counterparts, even in entirely Spanish-speaking areas. Quechua has also had a profound influence on other native languages of the Americas, such as Mapuche.\n\nThe number of speakers given varies widely according to the sources. The total in \"Ethnologue\" 16 is 10 million, mostly based on figures published 1987–2002, but with a few dating from the 1960s. The figure for Imbabura Highland Quechua in \"Ethnologue\", for example, is 300,000, an estimate from 1977.\n\nThe missionary organization FEDEPI, on the other hand, estimated one million Imbabura dialect speakers (published 2006). Census figures are also problematic, due to under-reporting. The 2001 Ecuador census reports only 500,000 Quechua speakers, compared to the estimate in most linguistic sources of more than 2 million. The censuses of Peru (2007) and Bolivia (2001) are thought to be more reliable.\n\n\nAdditionally, there is an unknown number of speakers in emigrant communities, including Queens, New York, and Paterson, New Jersey, in the United States.\n\nThere are significant differences among the varieties of Quechua spoken in the central Peruvian highlands and the peripheral varieties of Ecuador, as well as those of southern Peru and Bolivia. They can be labeled Quechua I (or Quechua B, central) and Quechua II (or Quechua A, peripheral). Within the two groups, there are few sharp boundaries, making them dialect continua.\n\nBut, there is a secondary division in Quechua II between the grammatically simplified northern varieties of Ecuador, Quechua II-B, known there as Kichwa, and the generally more conservative varieties of the southern highlands, Quechua II-C, which include the old Inca capital of Cusco. The closeness is at least in part because of the influence of Cusco Quechua on the Ecuadorean varieties in the Inca Empire. Because Northern nobles were required to educate their children in Cusco, this was maintained as the prestige dialect in the north.\n\nSpeakers from different points within any of the three regions can generally understand one another reasonably well. There are nonetheless significant local-level differences across each. (Wanka Quechua, in particular, has several very distinctive characteristics that make the variety more difficult to understand, even for other Central Quechua speakers.) Speakers from different major regions, particularly Central or Southern Quechua, are not able to communicate effectively.\n\nThe lack of mutual intelligibility among the dialects is the basic criterion that defines Quechua not as a single language, but as a language family. The complex and progressive nature of how speech varies across the dialect continua makes it nearly impossible to differentiate discrete varieties; \"Ethnologue\" lists 44 that it judged to require separate literature.\n\nAs a reference point, the overall degree of diversity across the family is a little less than that of the Romance or Germanic families, and more of the order of Slavic or Arabic. The greatest diversity is within Central Quechua, Quechua I, which is believed to lie close to the homeland of the ancestral Proto-Quechua language.\n\nAlfredo Torero devised the traditional classification, the three divisions above, plus a fourth, a northern or Peruvian branch. The latter causes complications in the classification, however, as the northern dialects (Cajamarca–Cañaris, Pacaraos, and Yauyos–Chincha) have features of both Quechua I and Quechua II, and so are difficult to assign to either.\n\nTorero classifies them as the following:\n\nWillem Adelaar adheres to the Quechua I / Quechua II (central/peripheral) bifurcation. But, partially following later modifications by Torero, he reassigns part of Quechua II-A to Quechua I:\n\nLanderman (1991) does not believe a truly genetic classification is possible and divides Quechua II so that the family has four geographical–typological branches: Northern, North Peruvian, Central, and Southern. He includes Chachapoyas and Lamas in North Peruvian Quechua so Ecuadorian is synonymous with Northern Quechua.\n\nQuechua I (Central Quechua, \"Waywash\") is spoken in Peru's central highlands, from the Ancash Region to Huancayo. It is the most diverse branch of Quechua, to the extent that its divisions are commonly considered different languages.\n\nQuechua II (Peripheral Quechua, \"Wamp'una\" \"Traveler\")\n\nThis is a sampling of words in several Quechuan languages:\n\nQuechua shares a large amount of vocabulary, and some striking structural parallels, with Aymara, and the two families have sometimes been grouped together as a \"Quechumaran family\". That hypothesis is generally rejected by specialists, however. The parallels are better explained by mutual influence and borrowing through intensive and longterm contact. Many Quechua–Aymara cognates are close, often closer than intra-Quechua cognates, and there is little relationship in the affixal system.\n\nA number of Quechua loanwords have entered English via Spanish, including \"coca\", \"condor\", \"guano\", \"jerky\", \"llama\", \"poncho\", \"puma\", \"quinine\", \"quinoa\", \"vicuña\", and, possibly, \"gaucho\". The word \"lagniappe\" comes from the Quechuan word \"yapay\" (\"to increase; to add\") with the Spanish article \"la\" in front of it, \"la yapa\" or \"la ñapa\" in Spanish.\n\nThe influence on Latin American Spanish includes such borrowings as \"papa\" for \"potato\", \"chuchaqui\" for \"hangover\" in Ecuador, and diverse borrowings for \"altitude sickness\", in Bolivia from Quechuan \"suruqch'i\" to Bolivian \"sorojchi\", in Ecuador and Peru \"soroche\".\n\nIn Bolivia, particularly, Quechua words are used extensively even by non-Quechua speakers. These include wawa (baby, infant), ch'aki (hangover), misi (cat), juk'ucho (mouse), q'omer uchu (green pepper), jacu (\"lets go\"), chhiri and chhurco (curly haired), among many others. Quechua grammar also enters Bolivian Spanish, such as the use of the suffix -ri. In Bolivian Quechua, -ri is added to verbs to signify an action is performed with affection or, in the imperative, as a rough equivalent to please. In Bolivia -ri is often included in the Spanish imperative to imply \"please\" or to soften commands. For example, the standard \"pásame\" (pass me), becomes pasarime.\n\nQuechua has borrowed a large number of Spanish words, such as \"piru\" (from \"pero\", but), \"bwenu\" (from \"bueno\", good), iskwila (from \"escuela,\" school), waka (from \"vaca,\" cow) and \"burru\" (from \"burro\", donkey).\n\nAt first, Spaniards referred to the language of the Inca empire as the \"lengua general\", the \"general language\". The name \"quichua\" is first used in 1560 by Domingo de Santo Tomás in his \"Grammatica o arte de la lengua general de los indios de los reynos del Perú\". It is not known what name the native speakers gave to their language before colonial times and whether it was Spaniards who called it \"quechua\".\n\nThere are two possible etymologies of Quechua as the name of the language. There is a possibility that the name Quechua was derived from \"*qiĉ.wa\", the native word which originally meant the \"temperate valley\" altitude ecological zone in the Andes (suitable for maize cultivation) and to its inhabitants.\n\nAlternatively, Pedro Cieza de León and Inca Garcilaso de la Vega, the early Spanish chroniclers, mention the existence of a people called Quichua in the present Apurímac Region, and it could be inferred that their name was given to the entire language.\n\nThe Hispanicised spellings \"Quechua\" and \"Quichua\" have been used in Peru and Bolivia since the 17th century, especially after the Third Council of Lima. Today, the various local pronunciations of \"Quechua Simi\" include , , , and .\n\nAnother name that native speakers give to their own language is \"runa simi\", \"language of man/people\"; it also seems to have emerged during the colonial period.\n\nThe description below applies to Cusco Quechua; there are significant differences in other varieties of Quechua.\n\nQuechua only has three vowel phonemes: and , as in Aymara (including Jaqaru). Monolingual speakers pronounce them as respectively, but Spanish realizations may also be found. When the vowels appear adjacent to uvular consonants (, , and ), they are rendered more like , and , respectively.\n\nVoicing is not phonemic in the Quechua native vocabulary of the modern Cusco variety.\n\nAbout 30% of the modern Quechua vocabulary is borrowed from Spanish, and some Spanish sounds (such as , , , ) may have become phonemic even among monolingual Quechua-speakers.\n\nCusco Quechua, North- and South-Bolivian Quechua are the only varieties of Quechua to have glottalized consonants, and they, along with certain kinds of Ecuadorian Kichwa, are the only varieties with aspirated consonants. Because reflexes of a given Proto-Quechua word may have different stops in neighboring dialects (Proto-Quechua \"čaki\" 'foot' becomes \"č’aki\" and \"čaka\" 'bridge' becomes \"čaka\"), they are thought to be innovations in Quechua from Aymara, borrowed independently after branching off from Proto-Quechua.\n\nGemination of the tap results in a trill .\n\nStress is penultimate in most dialects of Quechua. In some varieties, factors such as apocope of word-final vowels may cause exceptional final stress.\n\nQuechua has been written using the Roman alphabet since the Spanish conquest of the Inca Empire. However, written Quechua is rarely used by Quechua speakers because of the lack of printed referential material in Quechua.\n\nUntil the 20th century, Quechua was written with a Spanish-based orthography. Examples \"Inca, Huayna Cápac, Collasuyo, Mama Ocllo, Viracocha, quipu, tambo, condor\". That orthography is the most familiar to Spanish speakers and so has been used for most borrowings into English.\n\nIn 1975, the Peruvian government of Juan Velasco Alvarado adopted a new orthography for Quechua. That is the system preferred by the Academia Mayor de la Lengua Quechua: \"Inka, Wayna Qhapaq, Qollasuyu, Mama Oqllo, Wiraqocha, khipu, tampu, kuntur\". The orthography has these features:\n\nIn 1985, a variation of this system was adopted by the Peruvian government; it uses the Quechuan three-vowel system: \"Inka, Wayna Qhapaq, Qullasuyu, Mama Uqllu, Wiraqucha, khipu, tampu, kuntur\".\n\nThe different orthographies are still highly controversial in Peru. Advocates of the traditional system believe that the new orthographies look too foreign and suggest that it makes Quechua harder to learn for people who have first been exposed to written Spanish. Those who prefer the new system maintain that it better matches the phonology of Quechua, and they point to studies showing that teaching the five-vowel system to children later causes reading difficulties in Spanish.\n\nFor more on this, see Quechuan and Aymaran spelling shift.\n\nWriters differ in the treatment of Spanish loanwords. Sometimes, they are adapted to the modern orthography, and sometimes, they are left as in Spanish. For instance, \"I am Roberto\" could be written \"Robertom kani\" or \"Ruwirtum kani\". (The \"-m\" is not part of the name; it is an evidential suffix.)\n\nThe Peruvian linguist Rodolfo Cerrón Palomino has proposed an orthographic norm for all Southern Quechua: Standard Quechua (\"el Quechua estándar\" or \"Hanan Runasimi\") conservatively integrates features of two widespread dialects, Ayacucho Quechua and Cusco Quechua. For instance:\n\nToday the Spanish-based orthography is in conflict with the Peruvian law. According to Article 20 of \"Decreto Supremo No 004-2016-MC\" (Supreme Decree) which approves the Regulations to Law 29735, published in the official newspaper El Peruano on July 22, 2016, adequate spellings of the toponyms in the normalized alphabets of the indigenous languages must progressively be proposed with the aim of standardizing the namings used by the National Geographic Institute \"(Instituto Geográfico Nacional, IGN)\" The \"IGN\" realizes the necessary changes in the official maps of Peru.\n\nAll varieties of Quechua are very regular agglutinative languages, as opposed to isolating or fusional ones. Their normal sentence order is SOV (subject–object–verb). Their large number of suffixes changes both the overall significance of words and their subtle shades of meaning. Notable grammatical features include bipersonal conjugation (verbs agree with both subject and object), evidentiality (indication of the source and veracity of knowledge), a set of topic particles, and suffixes indicating who benefits from an action and the speaker's attitude toward it, but some languages and varieties may lack some of the characteristics.\n\nIn Quechua, there are seven pronouns. Quechua has two first-person plural pronouns (\"we\" in English). One is called the inclusive, which is used if the speaker wishes to include the addressee (\"we and you\"). The other form is called the exclusive, which is used when the addressee is excluded (\"we without you\"). Quechua also adds the suffix \"-kuna\" to the second and third person singular pronouns \"qam\" and \"pay\" to create the plural forms, \"qam-kuna\" and \"pay-kuna\".\n\nAdjectives in Quechua are always placed before nouns. They lack gender and number and are not declined to agree with substantives.\n\n\nNoun roots accept suffixes that indicate person (defining of possession, not identity), number, and case. In general, the personal suffix precedes that of number. In the Santiago del Estero variety, however, the order is reversed. From variety to variety, suffixes may change.\n\nAdverbs can be formed by adding \"-ta\" or, in some cases, \"-lla\" to an adjective: \"allin – allinta\" (\"good – well\"), \"utqay – utqaylla\" (\"quick – quickly\"). They are also formed by adding suffixes to demonstratives: \"chay\" (\"that\") – \"chaypi\" (\"there\"), \"kay\" (\"this\") – \"kayman\" (\"hither\").\n\nThere are several original adverbs. For Europeans, it is striking that the adverb \"qhipa\" means both \"behind\" and \"future\" and \"ñawpa\" means \"ahead, in front\" and \"past\". Local and temporal concepts of adverbs in Quechua (as well as in Aymara) are associated to each other reversely, compared to European languages. For the speakers of Quechua, we are moving backwards into the future (we cannot see it: it is unknown), facing the past (we can see it: it is remembered).\n\nThe infinitive forms (unconjugated) have the suffix \"-y\" (\"much'a\"= \"kiss\"; \"much'a-y\" = \"to kiss\"). These are the endings for the indicative:\nThe suffixes shown in the table above usually indicate the subject; the person of the object is also indicated by a suffix (\"-a-\" for first person and \"-su-\" for second person), which precedes the suffixes in the table. In such cases, the plural suffixes from the table (\"-chik\" and \"-ku\") can be used to express the number of the object rather than the subject.\n\nVarious suffixes are added to the stem to change the meaning. For example, \"-chi\" is a causative and \"-ku\" is a reflexive (example: \"wañuy\" = \"to die\"; \"wañuchiy\" = to kill \"wañuchikuy\" = \"to commit suicide\"); \"-naku\" is used for mutual action (example: \"marq'ay\"= \"to hug\"; \"marq'anakuy\"= \"to hug each other\"), and \"-chka\" is a progressive, used for an ongoing action (e.g., \"mikhuy\" = \"to eat\"; \"mikhuchkay\" = \"to be eating\").\n\nParticles are indeclinable: they do not accept suffixes. They are relatively rare, but the most common are \"arí\" (\"yes\") and \"mana\" (\"no\"), although \"mana\" can take some suffixes, such as \"-n\"/\"-m\" (\"manan\"/\"manam\"), \"-raq\" (\"manaraq\", not yet) and \"-chu\" (\"manachu?\", or not?), to intensify the meaning. Also used are \"yaw\" (\"hey\", \"hi\"), and certain loan words from Spanish, such as \"piru\" (from Spanish \"pero\" \"but\") and \"sinuqa\" (from \"sino\" \"rather\").\n\nThe Quechuan languages have three different morphemes that mark evidentiality. Evidentiality refers to a morpheme whose primary purpose is to indicate the source of information. In the Quechuan languages, evidentiality is a three-term system: there are three evidential morphemes that mark varying levels of source information. The markers can apply to the first, second, and third persons. The chart below depicts an example of these morphemes from Wanka Quechua:\nThe parentheses around the vowels indicate that the vowel can be dropped in when following an open vowel. For the sake of cohesiveness, the above forms are used to discuss the evidential morphemes. However, it should be noted that there are dialectal variations to the forms. The variations will be presented in the following descriptions.\n\nThe following sentences provide examples of the three evidentials and further discuss the meaning behind each of them.\n\nRegional variations: In Cusco Quechua, the direct evidential presents itself as \"–mi\" and \"–n\".\n\nThe evidential \"–mi\" indicates that the speaker has a \"strong personal conviction the veracity of the circumstance expressed.\" It has the basis of direct personal experience.\n\nWanka Quechua\n\nI saw them with my own eyes.\n\nIn Quechuan languages, not specified by the source, the inference morpheme appears as \"–ch(i), -ch(a), -chr(a)\".\n\nThe \"–chr(a)\" evidential indicates that the utterance is an inference or form of conjecture. That inference relays the speaker’s non-commitment to the truth-value of the statement. It also appears in cases such as acquiescence, irony, interrogative constructions, and first person inferences. These uses constitute nonprototypical use and will be later discussed in the \"changes in meaning and other uses\" section.\n\nWanka Quechua\n\nI think they will probably come back.\n\nRegional variations: It can appear as \"–sh(i)\" or \"–s(i)\" depending on the dialect.\n\nWith the use of this morpheme, the speaker \"serves as a conduit through which information from another source passes.\" The information being related is hearsay or revelatory in nature. It also works to express the uncertainty of the speaker regarding the situation. However, it also appears in other constructions that are discussed in the \"changes in meaning\" section.\n\nWanka Quechua\n\n(I was told) Shanti borrowed it.\n\nHintz discusses an interesting case of evidential behavior found in the Sihaus dialect of Ancash Quechua. The author postulates that instead of three single evidential markers, that Quechuan language contains three pairs of evidential markers.\n\nIt may have been noted the evidential morphemes have been referred to as markers or morphemes. The literature seems to differ on whether or not the evidential morphemes are acting as affixes or clitics, in some cases, such as Wanka Quechua, enclitics. Lefebvre and Muysken (1998) discuss this issue in terms of case but remark the line between affix and clitic is not clear. Both terms are used interchangeably throughout these sections.\n\nEvidentials in the Quechuan languages are \"second position enclitics\", which usually attach to the first constituent in the sentence, as shown in this example.\n\nOnce, there were an old man and an old woman.\n\nThey can, however, also occur on a focused constituent.\n\nIt is now that Pedro is building the house.\n\nSometimes, the affix is described as attaching to the focus, particularly in the Tarma dialect of Yaru Quechua, but this does not hold true for all varieties of Quechua. In Huanuco Quechua, the evidentials may follow any number of topics, marked by the topic marker \"–qa\", and the element with the evidential must precede the main verb or be the main verb.\n\nHowever, there are exceptions to that rule, and the more topics there are in a sentence, the more likely the sentence is to deviate from the usual pattern.\n\nWhen she (the witch) reached the peak, God had already taken the child up into heaven.\n\nEvidentials can be used to relay different meanings depending on the context and perform other functions. The following examples are restricted to Wanka Quechua.\n\nThe direct evidential, -mi\n\nThe direct evidential appears in wh-questions and yes/no questions. By considering the direct evidential in terms of prototypical semantics, it seems somewhat counterintuitive to have a direct evidential, basically an evidential that confirms the speaker’s certainty about a topic, in a question. However, if one focuses less on the structure and more on the situation, some sense can be made. The speaker is asking the addressee for information so the speaker assumes the speaker knows the answer. That assumption is where the direct evidential comes into play. The speaker holds a certain amount of certainty that the addressee will know the answer. The speaker interprets the addressee as being in \"direct relation\" to the proposed content; the situation is the same as when, in regular sentences, the speaker assumes direct relation to the proposed information.\n\nWhen did he come back from Huancayo?\n\nThe direct evidential affix is also seen in yes/no questions, similar to the situation with wh-questions. Floyd describes yes/no questions as being \"characterized as instructions to the addressee to assert one of the propositions of a disjunction.\" Once again, the burden of direct evidence is being placed on the addressee, not on the speaker. The question marker in Wanka Quechua, \"-chun\", is derived from the negative –chu marker and the direct evidential (realized as –n in some dialects).\n\nIs he going to Tarma?\n\nWhile \"–chr(a)\" is usually used in an inferential context, it has some non-prototypical uses.\n\n\"Mild Exhortation\"\nIn these constructions the evidential works to reaffirm and encourage the addressee’s actions or thoughts.\n\nYes, tell them, \"I've gone farther.\"\n\nThis example comes from a conversation between husband and wife, discussing the reactions of their family and friends after they have been gone for a while. The husband says he plans to stretch the truth and tell them about distant places to which he has gone, and his wife (in the example above) echoes and encourages his thoughts.\n\n\"Acquiescence\"\nWith these, the evidential is used to highlight the speaker’s assessment of inevitability of an event and acceptance of it. There is a sense of resistance, diminished enthusiasm, and disinclination in these constructions.\n\nI suppose I'll pay you then.\n\nThis example comes from a discourse where a woman demands compensation from the man (the speaker in the example) whose pigs ruined her potatoes. He denies the pigs as being his but finally realizes he may be responsible and produces the above example.\n\n\"Interrogative\"\nSomewhat similar to the \"–mi\" evidential, the inferential evidential can be found in content questions. However, the salient difference between the uses of the evidentials in questions is that in the \"–m(i)\" marked questions, an answer is expected. That is not the case with \"–chr(a)\" marked questions.\n\nI wonder what we will give our families when we arrive.\n\n\"Irony\"\nIrony in language can be a somewhat complicated topic in how it functions differently in languages, and by its semantic nature, it is already somewhat vague. For these purposes, it is suffice to say that when irony takes place in Wanka Quechua, the \"–chr(a)\" marker is used.\n(I suppose) That's how you learn [that is the way in which you will learn].\n\nThis example comes from discourse between a father and daughter about her refusal to attend school. It can be interpreted as a genuine statement (perhaps one can learn by resisting school) or as an ironic statement (that is an absurd idea).\n\nAside from being used to express hearsay and revelation, this affix also has other uses.\n\n\"Folktales, myths, and legends\"\n\nBecause folktales, myths, and legends are, in essence, reported speech, it follows that the hearsay marker would be used with them. Many of these types of stories are passed down through generations, furthering this aspect of reported speech. A difference between simple hearsay and folktales can be seen in the frequency of the \"–sh(i)\" marker. In normal conversation using reported speech, the marker is used less, to avoid redundancy.\n\n\"Riddles\"\n\nRiddles are somewhat similar to myths and folktales in that their nature is to be passed by word of mouth.\n\nIn certain grammatical structures, the evidential marker does not appear at all. In all Quechuan languages the evidential will not appear in a dependent clause. Sadly, no example was given to depict this omission.\nOmissions occur in Quechua. The sentence is understood to have the same evidentiality as the other sentences in the context. Quechuan speakers vary as to how much they omit evidentials, but they occur only in connected speech.\n\nAn interesting contrast to omission of evidentials is overuse of evidentials. If a speaker uses evidentials too much with no reason, competence is brought into question. For example, the overuse of –m(i) could lead others to believe that the speaker is not a native speaker or, in some extreme cases, that one is mentally ill.\n\nBy using evidentials, the Quechua culture has certain assumptions about the information being relayed. Those who do not abide by the cultural customs should not be trusted. A passage from Weber (1986) summarizes them nicely below:\n\nEvidentials also show that being precise and stating the source of one’s information is extremely important in the language and the culture. Failure to use them correctly can lead to diminished standing in the community. Speakers are aware of the evidentials and even use proverbs to teach children the importance of being precise and truthful. Precision and information source are of the utmost importance. They are a powerful and resourceful method of human communication.\n\nAlthough the body of literature in Quechua is not as sizable as its historical and current prominence would suggest, it is nevertheless not negligible.\n\nAs in the case of the pre-Columbian Mesoamerica, there are a number of surviving Andean documents in the local language that were written down in Latin characters after the European conquest, but they express, to a great extent, the culture of pre-Conquest times. That type of Quechua literature is somewhat scantier, but nevertheless significant. It includes the so-called Huarochirí Manuscript (1598), describing the mythology and religion of the valley of Huarochirí as well as Quechua poems quoted within the Spanish-language texts of some chronicles dealing with the pre-Conquest period. There are a number of anonymous or signed Quechua dramas dating from the post-conquest period (starting from the 17th century), some of which deal with the Inca era, while most are on religious topics and of European inspiration. The most famous dramas is \"Ollantay\" and the plays describing the death of Atahualpa. For example, Juan de Espinosa Medrano wrote several dramas in the language. Poems in Quechua were also composed during the colonial period.\n\nDramas and poems continued to be written in the 19th and especially in 20th centuries as well; in addition, in the 20th century and more recently, more prose has been published. While some of that literature consists of original compositions (poems and dramas), the bulk of 20th century Quechua literature consists of traditional folk stories and oral narratives. Johnny Payne has translated two sets of Quechua oral short stories, one into Spanish and the other into English.\n\nMany Andean musicians write and sing in their native languages, including Quechua and Aymara. Notable musical groups are Los Kjarkas, Kala Marka, J'acha Mallku, Savia Andina, Wayna Picchu, Wara and many others.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "25291", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25291", "title": "Protein quaternary structure", "text": "Protein quaternary structure\n\nProtein quaternary structure is the number and arrangement of multiple folded protein subunits in a multi-subunit complex. It includes organisations from simple dimers to large homooligomers and complexes with defined or variable numbers of subunits. It can also refer to biomolecular complexes of proteins with nucleic acids and other cofactors.\n\nMany proteins are actually assemblies of multiple polypeptide chains. The quaternary structure refers to the number and arrangement of the protein subunits with respect to one another. Examples of proteins with quaternary structure include hemoglobin, DNA polymerase, and ion channels.\n\nEnzymes composed of subunits with diverse functions are sometimes called holoenzymes, in which some parts may be known as regulatory subunits and the functional core is known as the catalytic subunit. Other assemblies referred to instead as multiprotein complexes also possess quaternary structure. Examples include nucleosomes and microtubules. Changes in quaternary structure can occur through conformational changes within individual subunits or through reorientation of the subunits relative to each other. It is through such changes, which underlie cooperativity and allostery in \"multimeric\" enzymes, that many proteins undergo regulation and perform their physiological function.\n\nThe above definition follows a classical approach to biochemistry, established at times when the distinction between a protein and a functional, proteinaceous unit was difficult to elucidate. More recently, people refer to protein–protein interaction when discussing quaternary structure of proteins and consider all assemblies of proteins as protein complexes.\n\nThe number of subunits in an oligomeric complex is described using names that end in -mer (Greek for \"part, subunit\"). Formal and Greco-Latinate names are generally used for the first ten types and can be used for up to twenty subunits, whereas higher order complexes are usually described by the number of subunits, followed by -meric.\n\nAlthough complexes higher than octamers are rarely observed for most proteins, there are some important exceptions. Viral capsids are often composed of multiples of 60 proteins. Several molecular machines are also found in the cell, such as the proteasome (four heptameric rings = 28 subunits), the transcription complex and the spliceosome. The ribosome is probably the largest molecular machine, and is composed of many RNA and protein molecules.\n\nIn some cases, proteins form complexes that then assemble into even larger complexes. In such cases, one uses the nomenclature, e.g., \"dimer of dimers\" or \"trimer of dimers\", to suggest that the complex might dissociate into smaller sub-complexes before dissociating into monomers.\n\nProtein quaternary structure can be determined using a variety of experimental techniques that require a sample of protein in a variety of experimental conditions. The experiments often provide an estimate of the mass of the native protein and, together with knowledge of the masses and/or stoichiometry of the subunits, allow the quaternary structure to be predicted with a given accuracy. It is not always possible to obtain a precise determination of the subunit composition for a variety of reasons.\n\nThe number of subunits in a protein complex can often be determined by measuring the hydrodynamic molecular volume or mass of the intact complex, which requires native solution conditions. For \"folded\" proteins, the mass can be inferred from its volume using the partial specific volume of 0.73 ml/g. However, volume measurements are less certain than mass measurements, since \"unfolded\" proteins appear to have a much larger volume than folded proteins; additional experiments are required to determine whether a protein is unfolded or has formed an oligomer.\n\nSome bioinformatics methods were developed for predicting the quaternary structural attributes of proteins based on their sequence information by using various modes of pseudo amino acid composition (see, e.g., refs.).\n\n\n\n\nMethods that measure the mass or volume under unfolding conditions (such as \nMALDI-TOF mass spectrometry and SDS-PAGE) are generally not useful, since non-native conditions usually cause the complex to dissociate into monomers. However, these may sometimes be applicable; for example, the experimenter may apply SDS-PAGE after first treating the intact complex with chemical cross-link reagents.\n\nProteins are capable of forming very tight complexes. For example, ribonuclease inhibitor binds to ribonuclease A with a roughly 20 fM dissociation constant. Other proteins have evolved to bind specifically to unusual moieties on another protein, e.g., biotin groups (avidin), phosphorylated tyrosines (SH2 domains) or proline-rich segments (SH3 domains).\n\n\n"}
{"id": "25292", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25292", "title": "Quest for Glory", "text": "Quest for Glory\n\nQuest for Glory is a series of hybrid adventure/role-playing video games, which were designed by Corey and Lori Ann Cole. The series was created in the Sierra Creative Interpreter, a toolset developed at Sierra specifically to assist with adventure game development. The series combines humor, puzzle elements, themes and characters borrowed from various legends, puns, and memorable characters, creating a 5-part series in the Sierra stable.\n\nThe series was originally titled \"Hero's Quest\". However, Sierra failed to trademark the name. The Milton Bradley Company successfully trademarked an electronic version of their unrelated joint Games Workshop board game, \"HeroQuest\", which forced Sierra to change the series' title to \"Quest for Glory\". This decision meant that all future games in the series (as well as newer releases of \"Hero's Quest I\") used the new name.\n\nLori Cole pitched Quest for Glory to Sierra as a: \"rich, narrative-driven, role-playing experience\".\n\nThe series consisted of five games, each of which followed directly upon the events of the last. New games frequently referred to previous entries in the series, often in the form of cameos by recurring characters. The objective of the series is to transform the player character from an average adventurer to a hero by completing non-linear quests.\n\nThe game also was revolutionary in its character import system. This allowed players to import their individual character, including the skills and wealth s/he had acquired, from one game to the next.\n\nHybrids by their gameplay and themes, the games feature serious stories leavened with humor throughout. There are real dangers to face, and true heroic feats to perform, but silly details and overtones creep in (when the drama of adventuring does not force them out). Cheap word play is particularly frequent, to the point that the second game's ending refers to itself as the hero's \"latest set of adventures and miserable puns.\"\n\nThe games have recurring story elements. For example, each installment in the series requires the player to create a dispel potion.\n\nThe games include a number of easter eggs, including a number of allusions to other Sierra games. For example, if a player types \"pick nose\" in the first game, (or clicks the lockpick icon on the player in the new version), if their lock-picking skill is high enough, the game responds: \"Success! You now have an open nose\". If the skill is too low, the player could insert the lock pick too far, killing himself. Another example is Dr. Cranium, an allusion to \"The Castle of Dr. Brain\", in the fourth game.\n\nEach game draws its inspiration from a different culture and mythology: (in order, Germanic/fairy tale; Middle Eastern/Arabian Nights; Egyptian/African; Slavic folklore; and finally Greco-Mediterranean) with the hero facing increasingly powerful opponents with help from characters who become more familiar from game to game.\n\nEach game varies somewhat from the tradition it is derived from; for example, Baba Yaga, a character borrowed from Slavic folklore, appears in the first game which is based on German mythology. The second game, which uses Middle Eastern folklore, introduces several Arab and African-themed characters who reappear in the third game based on Egyptian mythology. Characters from every game and genre in the series reappear in the fourth and fifth games. In addition to deviating from the player's expectations of the culture represented in each game, the series also includes a number of intentional anachronisms, such as the pizza-loving, mad scientists in the later games.\n\nMany CRPG enthusiasts consider the \"Quest for Glory\" series to be among the best in the genre, and the series is lauded for its non-linearity. The games are notable for blending the mechanics of adventure video games and roleplaying video games, their unique tone which combines pathos and humour, and the game systems which were ahead of their time, such as day-night cycles, non-playable characters which adhered to their own schedules within the games, and character improvement through both skill practice and point investiture. The website Polygon and the Kotaku blog have characterised the game as a precursor to modern day RPGs. Fraser Brown of the Destructoid blog considers the games: \"one of the greatest adventure series of all time\".\n\nRowan Kaizer of the blog Engadget credits the games' hybrid adventure and roleplaying systems for the series' success. \"The binary succeed/fail form of adventure game puzzles tended to either make those games too easy or too hard,\" he wrote, \"But most puzzles in \"Quest For Glory\" involved some kind of skill check for your hero. This meant that you could succeed at most challenges by practicing or exploring, instead of getting stuck on bizarre item-combination puzzles\".\n\nThe first four games are hybrid Adventure/Role playing video games with real-time combat, while the fifth game switches to the Action/RPG genre.\n\nThe gameplay standards established in earlier Sierra adventure games are enhanced by the player's ability to choose his character's career path from among the three traditional role-playing game backgrounds: fighter, magic-user/wizard and thief. Further variation is added by the ability to customize the Hero's abilities, including the option of selecting skills normally reserved for another character class, leading to unique combinations often referred to as \"hybrid characters\". During the second or third games, a character can be initiated as a Paladin by performing honorable actions, changing his class and abilities, and receiving a unique sword. This applies when the character is exported into later games. Any character that finishes any game in the series (except \"Dragon Fire\", the last in the series) can be exported to a more recent game (\"Shadows of Darkness\" has a glitch which allows one to import characters from the same game), keeping the character's statistics and parts of its inventory. If the character received the paladin sword, he would keep the magic sword (Soulforge or Piotyr's sword) and special paladin magic abilities. A character imported into a later game in the series from any other game can be assigned any character class, including Paladin.\n\nEach career path has its own strengths and weaknesses, and scenarios unique to the class because of the skills associated with it. Each class also has its own distinct way to solve various in-game puzzles, which encourage replay: some puzzles have up to four different solutions. For instance, if a door is closed, instead of lockpicking or casting an open spell, the fighter can simply knock down the door. The magic user and the thief are both non-confrontational characters, as they lack the close range ability of the fighter, but are better able to attack from a distance, using daggers or spells. An example of these separate paths can be seen early in the first game. A gold ring belonging to the healer rests in a nest on top of a tree; fighters might make it fall by hurling rocks, thieves may want to climb the tree, while a magic user can simply cast the fetch spell to retrieve the nest, and then, while the fighter and magic user return the ring for a reward, the thief can choose between returning or selling the same ring in the thieves' guild (which is not available for those not possessing the \"thieving\" skills). It is also possible to build, over the course of several games, a character that has points in every skill in the game, and can therefore perform nearly every task.\n\nEach character class features special abilities unique to that class, as well as a shared set of attributes which can be developed by performing tasks and completing quests. In general, for a particular game the maximum value which can be reached for an ability is 100*[the number of that game]. \"Quest for Glory V\" allows stat bonuses which can push an attribute over the maximum and lets certain classes raise certain attributes beyond the normal limits. \"Quest for Glory V\" also features special kinds of equipment which lower some stats while raising others. At the beginning of each game, the player may assign points to certain attributes, and certain classes only have specific attributes enabled, although skills can be added for an extra cost.\n\nGeneral attributes influence all characters' classes and how they interact with objects and other people in the game; high values in strength allows movement of heavier objects and communication helps with bargaining goods with sellers. These attributes are changed by performing actions related to the skill; climbing a tree eventually increases the skill value in climb, running increases vitality, and so on. There are also complementing skills which are only of associated with some classes; parry (the ability to block a blow with the sword), for instance, is mainly used by fighters and paladins, lock picking and sneaking thief's hobby, and the ability to cast magic spells is usually associated with magic user.\n\nVital statistics are depleted by performing some actions. Health, (determined by strength and vitality), determines the hit points of the character, which decreases when the player is attacked or harms himself. Stamina, (based on agility and vitality), limits the number of actions (exercise, fighting, running, etc.) the character is able to perform before needing rest or risking injury. Mana is only required by characters with skill in magic, and is calculated according to the character's intelligence and magic attributes.\n\nPuzzle and Experience points only show the development of the player and his progress in the game, though in the first game also affects the kind of random encounters a player faces, as some monsters only appear after a certain level of experience is reached.\n\nIn the valley barony of Spielburg, the evil ogress Baba Yaga has cursed the land and the baron who tried to drive her off. His children have disappeared, while the land is ravaged by monsters and brigands. The Valley of Spielburg is in need of a Hero able to solve these problems.\n\nThe original game was released in 1989 while a VGA remake was released in 1992.\n\n\"Quest for Glory II: Trial by Fire\" takes place in the land of Shapeir, in the world of Gloriana. Directly following from the events of the first game, the newly proclaimed Hero of Spielburg travels by flying carpet with his friends Abdulla Doo, Shameen and Shema to the desert city of Shapeir. The city is threatened by magical elementals, while the Emir Arus al-Din of Shapeir's sister city Raseir is missing and his city fallen under tyranny.\n\n\"Quest for Glory II\" is the only game in the series not to have originated or have been remade beyond the EGA graphics engine by Sierra, but AGD Interactive released a VGA remake of the game using the Adventure Game Studio engine on August 24, 2008.\n\nRakeesh the Paladin brings the Hero (and Prince of Shapeir) along with Uhura and her son Simba to his homeland, the town of Tarna in a jungle and savannah country called Fricana that resembles central African ecosystems.\n\nTarna is on the brink of war; the Simbani, the tribe of Uhura, are ready to do battle with the Leopardmen. Each tribe has stolen a sacred relic from the other, and both refuse to return it until the other side does. The Hero must prevent the war then thwart a demon who may be loosed upon the world.\n\nDrawn without warning from his victory in Fricana, the Hero arrives without equipment or explanation in the middle of the hazardous Dark One Caves in the distant land of Mordavia. While struggling to survive in this land plagued with undead, the Hero must prevent a dark power from summoning eternal darkness into the world.\n\nErasmus introduces the player character, the Hero, to the Greece-like kingdom of Silmaria, whose king was recently assassinated. Thus, the traditional Rites of Rulership are due to commence, and the victor will be crowned king. The Hero enters the contest with the assistance of Erasmus, Rakeesh, and many old friends from previous entries in the series. The Hero competes against competitors, including the Silmarian guard Kokeeno Pookameeso, the warlord Magnum Opus, the hulking Gort, and the warrior Elsa Von Spielburg.\n\n\nOriginally, the series was to be a tetralogy, consisting of 4 games, with the following themes and cycles: the 4 cardinal directions, the 4 classical elements, the 4 seasons and 4 different mythologies.\n\nThis is what the creators originally had in mind:\nHowever, when \"\" was designed, it was thought that it would be too difficult for the hero to go straight from Shapeir to Mordavia and defeat the Dark One. To solve the problem, a new game, \"\", was inserted into the canon, and resulting in a renumbering of the series. Evidence for this can be found in the end of \"\": the player is told that the next game will be \"\" and a fanged vampiric moon is shown, to hint at the next game's theme.\n\nThe developers discussed this in the Fall 1992 issue of Sierra's \"InterAction\" magazine, and an online chat room:\nSomewhere between finishing \"Trial by Fire\" and cranking up the design process for \"Shadows of Darkness\", the husband-and-wife team realized a fifth chapter would have to be added to bridge the games. That chapter became \"Wages of War\".\n\nThe concept of seasons in the games represents the maturation of the Hero as he moves from story to story. It's a critical component in a series that – from the very beginning – was designed to be a defined quartet of stories, representing an overall saga with a distinct beginning, middle, and end.\n\nIn the first episode, the player is a new graduate of the Famous Adventurer's Correspondence School, ready to venture out into the springtime of his career and build a rep. It's a light-hearted, exhilarating journey into the unknown that can be replayed three times with three distinct outlooks at puzzle-solving.\n\nIn the second chapter – \"Trial by Fire\" – the Hero enters the summer of his experience, facing more difficult challenges with more highly developed skills. While the episode is more serious and dangerous than its predecessor, it retains the enchanting mixture of fantasy, challenge, and humor that made the first game a hit with so many fans.\n\nOf all the reasons Lori and Corey found for creating a bridge between \"Trial by Fire\" and \"Shadows of Darkenss\", the most compelling was the feeling that the Hero character simply hadn't matured enough to face the very grim challenges awaiting him in Transylvania.\n\nAlong with the Hero, several recurring characters appear and re-appear throughout the series including: Rakeesh Sah Tarna, Baba Yaga, Abdullah Doo, Elsa von Spielburg, the evil Ad Avis, and others.\n\nThe fictional world in which the Quest for Glory series takes place includes the town of Spielburg (based on German folklore), the desert city of Shapeir (based on the Arabia of \"One Thousand and One Nights\"), the jungle city of Tarna (based on African mythology, especially Egypt), the hamlet of Mordavia (based on Slavic mythology) and Silmaria (based on Greek mythology). Adventures, monsters and story of the games are usually drawn from legends of the respective mythology on which a title is based, although there are several cross-over exceptions, like the Eastern European Baba Yaga also appearing in the first game, which is distinctly German.\n"}
{"id": "25293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25293", "title": "Quango", "text": "Quango\n\nA quango or QUANGO (less often QuANGO or QANGO) is a quasi-autonomous non-governmental organisation. The concept is most often applied in the United Kingdom and, to a lesser degree, Australia, Canada, Ireland, New Zealand, the United States, and other English-speaking countries. As its name suggests, a quango is a hybrid form of organization, with elements of both non-government organizations (NGOs) and public sector bodies. It is typically an organisation to which a government has devolved power, but which is still partly controlled and/or financed by government bodies.\n\nIn the UK, the term quango covers different \"arm's-length\" government bodies, including \"non-departmental public bodies\", non-ministerial departments, and executive agencies. One UK example is the Forestry Commission, which is a non-ministerial government department responsible for forestry in England and Scotland.\n\nThe term \"quasi-autonomous non-governmental organisation\" was created in 1967 by Alan Pifer of the US-based Carnegie Foundation, in an essay on the independence and accountability of public-funded bodies that are incorporated in the private sector. Pifer's term was shortened to the initialism \"\" – later spelt quango – by Anthony Barker, a British participant during a follow-up conference on the subject.\n\nIt describes an ostensibly non-governmental organisation performing governmental functions, often in receipt of funding or other support from government, while mainstream NGOs mostly get their donations or funds from the public and other organisations that support their cause. Numerous quangos were created from the 1980s onwards. Examples in the United Kingdom include those engaged in the regulation of various commercial and service sectors, such as the Water Services Regulation Authority.\n\nAn essential feature of a quango in the original definition was that it should not be a formal part of the state structure. The term was then extended to apply to a range of organisations, such as executive agencies providing (from 1988) health, education and other services. Particularly in the UK, this occurred in a polemical atmosphere in which it was alleged that proliferation of such bodies was undesirable and should be reversed (see below). This spawned the related acronym \"qualgo\", a 'quasi-autonomous \"local\" government organisation'.\n\nThe less contentious term non-departmental public body (NDPB) is often employed to identify numerous organisations with devolved governmental responsibilities. The UK government's definition in 1997 of a non-departmental public body or quango was:\n\"The Times\" has accused quangos of bureaucratic waste and excess. In 2005, Dan Lewis, author of \"The Essential Guide to Quangos\", claimed that the UK had 529 quangos, many of which were useless and duplicated the work of others.\n\nIn 2006 there were more than 800 quangos in Ireland, 482 at national and 350 at local level, with a total of 5,784 individual appointees and a combined annual budget of €13 billion.\n\nThe Cabinet Office 2009 report on non-departmental public bodies found that there are 766 NDPBs sponsored by the UK government.\nThe number has been falling: there were 790 in 2008 and 827 in 2007. The number of NDPBs has fallen by over 10% since 1997. Staffing and expenditure of NDPBs have increased. They employed 111,000 people in 2009 and spent £46.5 billion, of which £38.4 billion was directly funded by the Government.\n\nSince the coalition government of Conservatives and Liberal Democrats was formed in May 2010, numerous NDPBs have been abolished under Conservative plans to reduce the overall budget deficit by reducing the size of the public sector. As of the end of July 2010, the government had abolished at least 80 NDPBs and warned many others that they faced mergers or deep cuts. In September 2010, \"The Telegraph\" published a leaked Cabinet Office list suggesting that a further 94 could be abolished, while four would be privatised and 129 merged. In August 2012, Cabinet Office minister Francis Maude said the government was on course to abolish 204 public bodies by 2015, and said this would create a net saving of at least £2.6 billion.\n\nUse of the term quango is less common and therefore more controversial in the United States. However, Paul Krugman has stated that the US Federal Reserve is, effectively, \"what the British call a quango... Its complex structure divides power between the federal government and the private banks that are its members, and in effect gives substantial autonomy to a governing board of long-term appointees.\"\n\n\n"}
{"id": "25295", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25295", "title": "Quiver", "text": "Quiver\n\nA quiver is a container for holding arrows, bolts, or darts. It can be carried on an archer's body, the bow, or the ground, depending on the type of shooting and the archer's personal preference. Quivers were traditionally made of leather, wood, furs, and other natural materials, but are now often made of metal or plastic.\n\nThe most common style of quiver is a flat or cylindrical container suspended from the belt. They are found across many cultures from North America to China. Many variations of this type exist, such as being canted forwards or backwards, and being carried on the dominant hand side, off-hand side, or the small of the back. Some variants enclose almost the entire arrow, while minimalist \"pocket quivers\" consist of little more than a small stiff pouch that only covers the first few inches.\n\nBack quivers are secured to the archer's back via straps, with the nock ends protruding above the dominant hand's shoulder. Arrows can be drawn over the shoulder rapidly by the nock. This style of quiver was used by native peoples of North America and Africa, and was also commonly depicted in bas-reliefs from ancient Assyria. While popular in cinema and 20th century art for depictions of medieval European characters (such as Robin Hood), this style of quiver was rarely used in medieval Europe. The Bayeux Tapestry shows that most bowmen in medieval Europe used belt quivers.\n\nA ground quiver is used for both target shooting or warfare when the archer is shooting from a fixed location. They can be simply stakes in the ground with a ring at the top to hold the arrows, or more elaborate designs that hold the arrows within reach without the archer having to lean down to draw.\n\nA modern invention, the bow quiver attaches directly to the bow's limbs and holds the arrows steady with a clip of some kind. They are popular with compound bow hunters as it allows one piece of equipment to be carried in the field without encumbering the hunter's body.\n\nA style used by medieval English Longbowmen and several other cultures, an arrow bag is a simple drawstring cloth sack with a leather spacer at the top to keep the arrows divided. When not in use, the drawstring could be closed, completely covering the arrows so as to protect them from rain and dirt. Some had straps or rope sewn to them for carrying, but many either were tucked into the belt or set on the ground before battle to allow easier access.\n\nYebira refers to a variety of quiver designs. The Yazutsu is a different type, used in Kyudo. Arrows are removed from it before shooting, and held in the hand, so it is mainly used to transport and protect arrows.\n\n\nDr. Brian Marin, author of Ancient Warfare| Concordia Press| page 137\n\n"}
{"id": "25296", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25296", "title": "Quid", "text": "Quid\n\nQuid may refer to:\n\n\n"}
{"id": "25297", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25297", "title": "Quinine", "text": "Quinine\n\nQuinine is a medication used to treat malaria and babesiosis. This includes the treatment of malaria due to \"Plasmodium falciparum\" that is resistant to chloroquine when artesunate is not available. While used for restless legs syndrome, it is not recommended for this purpose due to the risk of side effects. It can be taken by mouth or used intravenously. Malaria resistant to quinine occurs in certain areas of the world. Some quantities are also used in tonic water and give it its bitter taste.\nCommon side effects include headache, ringing in the ears, trouble seeing, and sweating. More severe side effects include deafness, low blood platelets, and an irregular heartbeat. Use can make one more prone to sunburn. While it is unclear if use during pregnancy causes harm to the baby, use to treat malaria during pregnancy is still recommended. How it works is not entirely clear. It is an alkaloid.\nQuinine was first isolated in 1820 from the bark of a cinchona tree. Bark extracts have been used to treat malaria since at least 1632. It is on the World Health Organization's List of Essential Medicines, the most effective and safe medicines needed in a health system. The wholesale price in the developing world is about US$1.70 to $3.40 per course of treatment. In the United States a course of treatment is more than $200.\n\nAs of 2006, it is no longer recommended by the WHO (World Health Organization) as a first-line treatment for malaria, and it should be used only when artemisinins are not available. Quinine is also used to treat lupus and arthritis.\n\nIn the past, quinine was frequently prescribed as an off-label treatment for leg cramps at night, but this has become less common due to a Food and Drug Administration warning that this practice is associated with life-threatening side effects.\n\nQuinine is a basic amine and is usually provided as a salt. Various existing preparations include the hydrochloride, dihydrochloride, sulfate, bisulfate and gluconate. In the United States, quinine sulfate is commercially available in 324-mg tablets under the brand name Qualaquin.\n\nAll quinine salts may be given orally or intravenously (IV); quinine gluconate may also be given intramuscularly (IM) or rectally (PR). The main problem with the rectal route is that the dose can be expelled before it is completely absorbed; in practice, this is corrected by giving a further half dose. No injectable preparation of quinine is licensed in the US; quinidine is used instead.\n\nQuinine is a flavour component of tonic water and bitter lemon drink mixers. On the soda gun behind many bars, tonic water is designated by the letter \"Q\" representing quinine.\n\nAccording to tradition, the bitter taste of anti-malarial quinine tonic led British colonials in India to mix it with gin, thus creating the iconic gin and tonic cocktail, which is still popular today. Quinine is an ingredient in both tonic water and bitter lemon. In the US, quinine is listed as an ingredient in some Diet Snapple flavors, including Cranberry-Raspberry.\n\nIn France, quinine is an ingredient of an \"apéritif\" known as \"quinquina\" or \"Cap Corse\". In Spain, quinine (\"Peruvian bark\") is sometimes blended into sweet Malaga wine, which is then called \"Malaga Quina\". In Italy, the traditional flavoured wine Barolo Chinato is infused with quinine and local herbs and is served as a \"digestif\". In Canada and Italy, quinine is an ingredient in the carbonated chinotto beverages Brio and San Pellegrino. In Scotland, the company A.G. Barr uses quinine as an ingredient in the carbonated and caffeinated beverage Irn-Bru. In Uruguay and Argentina, quinine is an ingredient of a PepsiCo tonic water named Paso de los Toros. In Denmark, it is used as an ingredient in the carbonated sports drink Faxe Kondi made by Royal Unibrew.\n\nIn some areas, non-medical use of quinine is regulated. For example, in the United States and Germany, quinine is limited to between 83 and 85 parts per million.\n\nQuinine (and quinidine) are used as the chiral moiety for the ligands used in Sharpless asymmetric dihydroxylation as well as for numerous other chiral catalyst backbones. Because of its relatively constant and well-known fluorescence quantum yield, quinine is used in photochemistry as a common fluorescence standard.\n\nQuinine can cause abnormal heart rhythms, and should be avoided if possible in patients with atrial fibrillation, conduction defects, or heart block. Quinine can cause hemolysis in G6PD deficiency (an inherited deficiency), but this risk is small and the physician should not hesitate to use quinine in patients with G6PD deficiency when there is no alternative.\n\nQuinine can cause unpredictable serious and life-threatening blood and cardiovascular reactions including low platelet count and hemolytic-uremic syndrome/thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (HUS/TTP), long QT syndrome and other serious cardiac arrhythmias including torsades de pointes, blackwater fever, disseminated intravascular coagulation, leukopenia, and neutropenia. Some people who have developed TTP due to quinine have gone on to develop kidney failure.\n\nIt can also cause serious hypersensitivity reactions include anaphylactic shock, urticaria, serious skin rashes, including Stevens-Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis, angioedema, facial edema, bronchospasm, granulomatous hepatitis, and itchiness.\n\nThe most common adverse effects involve a group of symptoms called cinchonism; almost everyone taking quinine has mild cinchonism , which can include headache, vasodilation and sweating, nausea, tinnitus, hearing impairment, vertigo or dizziness, blurred vision, and disturbance in color perception . More severe cinchonism includes vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal pain, deafness, blindness, and disturbances in heart rhythms. Cinchonism is much less common when quinine is given by mouth, but oral quinine is not well tolerated (quinine is exceedingly bitter and many patients will vomit after ingesting quinine tablets): Other drugs, such as Fansidar (sulfadoxine with pyrimethamine) or Malarone (proguanil with atovaquone), are often used when oral therapy is required. Quinine ethyl carbonate is tasteless and odourless, but is available commercially only in Japan. Blood glucose, electrolyte and cardiac monitoring are not necessary when quinine is given by mouth.\n\nQuinine is theorized to be toxic to the Plasmodium falciparum by interfering with the parasite's ability to dissolve and metabolize hemoglobin. As with other quinoline antimalarial drugs, the mechanism of action of quinine has not been fully resolved. The most widely accepted hypothesis of its action is based on the well-studied and closely related quinoline drug, chloroquine. This model involves the inhibition of hemozoin biocrystallization in Heme Detoxification pathway, which facilitates the aggregation of cytotoxic heme. Free cytotoxic heme accumulates in the parasites, causing their deaths.\n\nThe UV absorption of quinine peaks around 350 nm (in UVA). Fluorescent emission peaks at around 460 nm (bright blue/cyan hue). Quinine is highly fluorescent (quantum yield ~0.58) in 0.1 M sulfuric acid solution.\n\nCinchona trees remain the only economically practical source of quinine. However, under wartime pressure, research towards its synthetic production was undertaken. A formal chemical synthesis was accomplished in 1944 by American chemists R.B. Woodward and W.E. Doering. Since then, several more efficient quinine total syntheses have been achieved, but none of them can compete in economic terms with isolation of the alkaloid from natural sources. The first synthetic organic dye, mauveine, was discovered by William Henry Perkin in 1856 while he was attempting to synthesize quinine.\n\nThe bark of \"Remijia\" contains 0.5–2% of quinine. The bark is cheaper than bark of \"Cinchona\", and as it has an intense taste it is used for making tonic water.\n\nQuinine was used as a muscle relaxant by the Quechua, who are indigenous to Peru, Bolivia and Ecuador, to halt shivering due to low temperatures. The Quechuas would mix the ground bark of cinchona trees with sweetened water to offset the bark's bitter taste, thus producing tonic water.\n\nThe Jesuits were the first to bring cinchona to Europe. The Spanish were aware of the medicinal properties of cinchona bark by the 1570s or earlier: Nicolás Monardes (1571) and Juan Fragoso (1572) both described a tree that was subsequently identified as the cinchona tree and whose bark was used to produce a drink to treat diarrhea. Quinine has been used in unextracted form by Europeans since at least the early 17th century. It was first used to treat malaria in Rome in 1631. During the 17th century, malaria was endemic to the swamps and marshes surrounding the city of Rome. Malaria was responsible for the deaths of several popes, many cardinals and countless common Roman citizens. Most of the priests trained in Rome had seen malaria victims and were familiar with the shivering brought on by the febrile phase of the disease. The Jesuit brother Agostino Salumbrino (1564–1642), an apothecary by training who lived in Lima, observed the Quechua using the bark of the cinchona tree for that purpose. While its effect in treating malaria (and hence malaria-induced shivering) was unrelated to its effect in controlling shivering from rigors, it was still a successful medicine for malaria. At the first opportunity, Salumbrino sent a small quantity to Rome to test as a malaria treatment. In the years that followed, cinchona bark, known as Jesuit's bark or Peruvian bark, became one of the most valuable commodities shipped from Peru to Europe. When King Charles II was cured of malaria at the end of the 17th Century with quinine, it became popular in London. It remained the antimalarial drug of choice until the 1940s, when other drugs took over.\n\nThe form of quinine most effective in treating malaria was found by Charles Marie de La Condamine in 1737. In 1820, French researchers Pierre Joseph Pelletier and Joseph Bienaimé Caventou first isolated quinine from the bark of a tree in the \"Cinchona\" genus - probably \"Cinchona officinalis\" - and subsequently named the substance. The name was derived from the original Quechua (Inca) word for the cinchona tree bark, \"quina\" or \"quina-quina\", which means \"bark of bark\" or \"holy bark\". Prior to 1820, the bark was first dried, ground to a fine powder, and then mixed into a liquid (commonly wine) which was then drunk. Large-scale use of quinine as a prophylaxis started around 1850; for instance in 1853 Paul Briquet published a brief history and discussion of the literature on \"quinquina\".\n\nIt was the first effective treatment for malaria caused by \"Plasmodium falciparum\", appearing in therapeutics in the 17th century. It remained the antimalarial drug of choice until the 1940s, when other drugs, such as chloroquine, that have fewer side effects replaced it. Since then, many effective antimalarials have been introduced, although quinine is still used to treat the disease in certain critical circumstances, such as severe malaria, and in impoverished regions, due to its low cost. Quinine is also present (in minute quantities) in various beverages. It is a white crystalline alkaloid.\n\nQuinine also played a significant role in the colonization of Africa by Europeans. Quinine had been said to be the prime reason Africa ceased to be known as the \"white man's grave\". A historian has stated, \"it was quinine's efficacy that gave colonists fresh opportunities to swarm into the Gold Coast, Nigeria and other parts of west Africa\".\n\nTo maintain their monopoly on cinchona bark, Peru and surrounding countries began outlawing the export of cinchona seeds and saplings beginning in the early 19th century. The Dutch government persisted in its attempt to smuggle the seeds, and by the 1930s Dutch plantations in Java were producing 22 million pounds of cinchona bark, or 97% of the world's quinine production. During World War II, Allied powers were cut off from their supply of quinine when the Germans conquered the Netherlands and the Japanese controlled the Philippines and Indonesia. The United States had managed to obtain four million cinchona seeds from the Philippines and began operating cinchona plantations in Costa Rica. Nonetheless, such supplies came too late; tens of thousands of US troops in Africa and the South Pacific died due to the lack of quinine. Despite controlling the supply, the Japanese did not make effective use of quinine, and thousands of Japanese troops in the southwest Pacific died as a result.\n\n\"Bromo Quinine\" were brand name cold tablets containing quinine, manufactured by Grove Laboratories. They were first marketed in 1889 and at least available until the 1960s.\n\nFrom 1969 to 1992, the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) received 157 reports of health problems related to quinine use, including 23 which had resulted in death. In 1994, the FDA banned the marketing of over-the-counter quinine as a treatment for nocturnal leg cramps. Pfizer Pharmaceuticals had been selling the brand name Legatrin for this purpose. Also sold as a Softgel (by SmithKlineBeecham) as Q-vel. Doctors may still prescribe quinine, but the FDA has ordered firms to stop marketing unapproved drug products containing quinine. The FDA is also cautioning consumers about off-label use of quinine to treat leg cramps. Quinine is approved for treatment of malaria, but is also commonly prescribed to treat leg cramps and similar conditions. Because malaria is life-threatening, the risks associated with quinine use are considered acceptable when used to treat that affliction.\n\nThough Legatrin was banned by the FDA for the treatment of leg cramps, the drug manufacturer URL Mutual has branded a quinine-containing drug named Qualaquin. It is marketed as a treatment for malaria and is sold in the United States only by prescription. In 2004, the CDC reported only 1,347 confirmed cases of malaria in the United States.\n\nQuinine is sometimes detected as a cutting agent in street drugs such as cocaine and heroin.\n\nQuinine is used as a treatment for \"Cryptocaryon irritans\" (commonly referred to as white spot, crypto or marine ich) infection of marine aquarium fish.\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "25298", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25298", "title": "Quincy", "text": "Quincy\n\nQuincy may refer to:\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "25301", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25301", "title": "Quimby", "text": "Quimby\n\nQuimby may refer to:\n\n"}
{"id": "25302", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25302", "title": "Quail", "text": "Quail\n\nQuail is a collective name for several genera of mid-sized birds generally placed in the order Galliformes. \nOld World quail are placed in the family Phasianidae, and New World quail are placed in the family Odontophoridae. The species of buttonquail are named for their superficial resemblance to quail, and form the family Turnicidae in the order Charadriiformes. The king quail, an Old World quail, often is sold in the pet trade, and within this trade is commonly, though mistakenly, referred to as a \"button quail\". Many of the common larger species are farm-raised for table food or egg consumption, and are hunted on game farms or in the wild, where they may be released to supplement the wild population, or extend into areas outside their natural range. In 2007, 40 million quail were produced in the U.S. \n\nThe collective noun for a group of quail is a flock, covey or bevy.\n\n\nQuail that have fed on hemlock (e.g., during migration) may induce acute renal failure due to accumulation of toxic substances from the hemlock in the meat; this problem is referred to as \"coturnism\".\n\n\n"}
{"id": "25303", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25303", "title": "Quagmire (disambiguation)", "text": "Quagmire (disambiguation)\n\nQuagmire may refer to:\n\n\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "25305", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25305", "title": "Crossbow bolt", "text": "Crossbow bolt\n\nA quarrel or bolt is the arrow used in a crossbow. The name \"quarrel\" is derived from the French \"carré\", meaning square, referring to the fact that they typically have square heads. Although their lengths vary, they are typically shorter than traditional arrows.\n"}
{"id": "25308", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25308", "title": "Quasispecies model", "text": "Quasispecies model\n\nThe quasispecies model is a description of the process of the Darwinian evolution of certain self-replicating entities within the framework of physical chemistry. Put simply, a quasispecies is a large group or cloud of related genotypes that exist in an environment of high mutation rate, where a large fraction of offspring are expected to contain one or more mutations relative to the parent. This is in contrast to a species, which from an evolutionary perspective is a more-or-less stable single genotype, most of the offspring of which will be genetically accurate copies.\n\nIt is useful mainly in providing a qualitative understanding of the evolutionary processes of self-replicating macromolecules such as RNA or DNA or simple asexual organisms such as bacteria or viruses (see also viral quasispecies), and is helpful in explaining something of the early stages of the origin of life. Quantitative predictions based on this model are difficult because the parameters that serve as its input are impossible to obtain from actual biological systems. The quasispecies model was put forward by Manfred Eigen and Peter Schuster based on initial work done by Eigen.\n\nWhen evolutionary biologists describe competition between species, they generally assume that each species is a single genotype whose descendants are mostly accurate copies. (Such genotypes are said to have a high reproductive \"fidelity\".) Evolutionarily, we are interested in the behavior and fitness of that one species or genotype over time.\n\nSome organisms or genotypes, however, may exist in circumstances of low fidelity, where most descendants contain one or more mutations. A group of such genotypes is constantly changing, so discussions of which single genotype is the most fit become meaningless. Importantly, if many closely related genotypes are only one mutation away from each other, then genotypes in the group can mutate back and forth into each other. For example, with one mutation per generation, a child of the sequence AGGT could be AGTT, and a grandchild could be AGGT again. Thus we can envision a cloud of related genotypes that is rapidly mutating, with sequences going back and forth among different points in the cloud. Though the proper definition is mathematical, that cloud, roughly speaking, is a quasispecies.\n\nQuasispecies behavior exists for large numbers of individuals existing at a certain (high) range of mutation rates.\n\nIn a species, though reproduction may be mostly accurate, periodic mutations will give rise to one or more competing genotypes. If a mutation results in greater replication and survival, the mutant genotype may out-compete the parent genotype and come to dominate the species. Thus, the individual genotypes (or species) may be seen as the units on which selection acts and biologists will often speak of a single genotype's fitness.\n\nIn a quasispecies, however, mutations are ubiquitous and so the fitness of an individual genotype becomes meaningless: if one particular mutation generates a boost in reproductive success, it can't amount to much because that genotype's offspring are unlikely to be accurate copies with the same properties. Instead, what matters is the \"connectedness\" of the cloud. For example, the sequence AGGT has 12 (3+3+3+3) possible single point mutants AGGA, AGGG, and so on. If 10 of those mutants are viable genotypes that may reproduce (and some of whose offspring or grandchildren may mutate back into AGGT again), we would consider that sequence a well-connected node in the cloud. If instead only two of those mutants are viable, the rest being lethal mutations, then that sequence is poorly connected and most of its descendants will not reproduce. The analog of fitness for a quasispecies is the tendency of nearby relatives within the cloud to be well-connected, meaning that more of the mutant descendants will be viable and give rise to further descendants within the cloud.\n\nWhen the fitness of a single genotype becomes meaningless because of the high rate of mutations, the cloud as a whole or quasispecies becomes the natural unit of selection.\n\nQuasispecies represents the evolution of high-mutation-rate viruses such as HIV and sometimes single genes or molecules within the genomes of other organisms. Quasispecies models have also been proposed by Jose Fontanari and Emmanuel David Tannenbaum to model the evolution of sexual reproduction. Quasispecies was also shown in compositional replicators (based on the Gard model for abiogenesis) and was also suggested to be applicable to describe cell's replication, which amongst other things requires the maintenance and evolution of the internal composition of the parent and bud.\n\nThe model rests on four assumptions:\n\nIn the quasispecies model, mutations occur through errors made in the process of copying already existing sequences. Further, selection arises because different types of sequences tend to replicate at different rates, which leads to the suppression of sequences that replicate more slowly in favor of sequences that replicate faster. However, the quasispecies model does not predict the ultimate extinction of all but the fastest replicating sequence. Although the sequences that replicate more slowly cannot sustain their abundance level by themselves, they are constantly replenished as sequences that replicate faster mutate into them. At equilibrium, removal of slowly replicating sequences due to decay or outflow is balanced by replenishing, so that even relatively slowly replicating sequences can remain present in finite abundance.\n\nDue to the ongoing production of mutant sequences, selection does not act on single sequences, but on mutational \"clouds\" of closely related sequences, referred to as \"quasispecies\". In other words, the evolutionary success of a particular sequence depends not only on its own replication rate, but also on the replication rates of the mutant sequences it produces, and on the replication rates of the sequences of which it is a mutant. As a consequence, the sequence that replicates fastest may even disappear completely in selection-mutation equilibrium, in favor of more slowly replicating sequences that are part of a quasispecies with a higher average growth rate. Mutational clouds as predicted by the quasispecies model have been observed in RNA viruses and in \"in vitro\" RNA replication.\n\nThe mutation rate and the general fitness of the molecular sequences and their neighbors is crucial to the formation of a quasispecies. If the mutation rate is zero, there is no exchange by mutation, and each sequence is its own species. If the mutation rate is too high, exceeding what is known as the error threshold, the quasispecies will break down and be dispersed over the entire range of available sequences.\n\nA simple mathematical model for a quasispecies is as follows: let there be formula_1 possible sequences and let there be formula_2 organisms with sequence \"i\". Let's say that each of these organisms asexually gives rise to formula_3 offspring. Some are duplicates of their parent, having sequence \"i\", but some are mutant and have some other sequence. Let the mutation rate formula_4 correspond to the probability that a \"j\" type parent will produce an \"i\" type organism. Then the expected fraction of offspring generated by \"j\" type organisms that would be \"i\" type organisms is formula_5,\n\nwhere formula_6.\n\nThen the total number of \"i\"-type organisms after the first round of reproduction, given as formula_7, is\n\nSometimes a death rate term formula_9 is included so that:\n\nwhere formula_11 is equal to 1 when i=j and is zero otherwise. Note that the \"n-th\" generation can be found by just taking the \"n-th\" power of W substituting it in place of W in the above formula.\n\nThis is just a system of linear equations. The usual way to solve such a system is to first diagonalize the W matrix. Its diagonal entries will be eigenvalues corresponding to certain linear combinations of certain subsets of sequences which will be eigenvectors of the W matrix. These subsets of sequences are the quasispecies. Assuming that the matrix W is a primitive matrix (irreducible and aperiodic), then after very many generations only the eigenvector with the largest eigenvalue will prevail, and it is this quasispecies that will eventually dominate. The components of this eigenvector give the relative abundance of each sequence at equilibrium.\n\nW being primitive means that for some integer formula_12, that the formula_13 power of W is > 0, i.e. all the entries are positive. If W is primitive then each type can, through a sequence of mutations (i.e. powers of W) mutate into all the other types after some number of generations. W is not primitive if it is periodic, where the population can perpetually cycle through different disjoint sets of compositions, or if it is reducible, where the dominant species (or quasispecies) that develops can depend on the initial population, as is the case in the simple example given below.\n\nThe quasispecies formulae may be expressed as a set of linear differential equations. If we consider the difference between the new state formula_7 and the old state formula_2 to be the state change over one moment of time, then we can state that the time derivative of formula_2 is given by this difference, formula_17 we can write:\n\nThe quasispecies equations are usually expressed in terms of concentrations formula_19 where\n\nThe above equations for the quasispecies then become for the discrete version:\n\nor, for the continuum version:\n\nThe quasispecies concept can be illustrated by a simple system consisting of 4 sequences. Sequences [0,0], [0,1], [1,0], and [1,1] are numbered 1, 2, 3, and 4, respectively. Let's say the [0,0] sequence never mutates and always produces a single offspring. Let's say the other 3 sequences all produce, on average, formula_24 replicas of themselves, and formula_25 of each of the other two types, where formula_26. The W matrix is then:\n\nThe diagonalized matrix is:\n\nAnd the eigenvectors corresponding to these eigenvalues are:\n\nOnly the eigenvalue formula_29 is more than unity. For the n-th generation, the corresponding eigenvalue will be formula_30 and so will increase without bound as time goes by. This eigenvalue corresponds to the eigenvector [0,1,1,1], which represents the quasispecies consisting of sequences 2, 3, and 4, which will be present in equal numbers after a very long time. Since all population numbers must be positive, the first two quasispecies are not legitimate. The third quasispecies consists of only the non-mutating sequence 1. It's seen that even though sequence 1 is the most fit in the sense that it reproduces more of itself than any other sequence, the quasispecies consisting of the other three sequences will eventually dominate (assuming that the initial population was not homogeneous of the sequence 1 type).\n\n"}
{"id": "25310", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25310", "title": "Qing dynasty", "text": "Qing dynasty\n\nThe Qing dynasty, officially the Great Qing (), also called the Qing Empire by itself or the Manchu dynasty by foreigners, was the last imperial dynasty of China, established in 1636 and ruling China from 1644 to 1912 with a brief, abortive restoration in 1917. It was preceded by the Ming dynasty and succeeded by the Republic of China. The Qing multi-cultural empire lasted almost three centuries and formed the territorial base for the modern Chinese state.\n\nThe dynasty was founded by the Jurchen Aisin Gioro clan in Manchuria. In the late sixteenth century, Nurhaci, originally a Ming vassal, began organizing \"Banners\", military-social units that included Jurchen, Han Chinese, and Mongol elements. Nurhaci formed the Jurchen clans into a unified entity, which he renamed as the Manchus. By 1636, his son Hong Taiji began driving Ming forces out of Liaodong and declared a new dynasty, the Qing. In 1644, peasant rebels led by Li Zicheng conquered the Ming capital, Beijing. Rather than serve them, Ming general Wu Sangui made an alliance with the Manchus and opened the Shanhai Pass to the Banner Armies led by the regent Prince Dorgon, who defeated the rebels and seized the capital. Resistance from the Southern Ming and the Revolt of the Three Feudatories led by Wu Sangui extended the conquest of China proper for nearly four decades and was not completed until 1683 under the Kangxi Emperor (r. 1661–1722). The Ten Great Campaigns of the Qianlong Emperor from the 1750s to the 1790s extended Qing control into Central Asia. The early rulers maintained their Manchu ways, and while their title was Emperor, they used khan to the Mongols and they were patrons of Tibetan Buddhism. They governed using Confucian styles and institutions of bureaucratic government and retained the imperial examinations to recruit Han Chinese to work under or in parallel with Manchus. They also adapted the ideals of the tributary system in dealing with neighboring territories.\n\nDuring the Qianlong reign (1735–96) the dynasty reached its apogee but then began its initial decline in prosperity and imperial control. The population rose to some 400 million, but taxes and government revenues were fixed at a low rate, virtually guaranteeing eventual fiscal crisis. Corruption set in, rebels tested government legitimacy, and ruling elites failed to change their mindsets in the face of changes in the world system. Following the Opium War, European powers imposed unequal treaties, free trade, extraterritoriality and treaty ports under foreign control. The Taiping Rebellion (1850–64) and the Dungan Revolt (1862–77) in Central Asia led to the deaths of some 20 million people, most of them due to famines caused by war. In spite of these disasters, in the Tongzhi Restoration of the 1860s, Han Chinese elites rallied to the defense of the Confucian order and the Qing rulers. The initial gains in the Self-Strengthening Movement were destroyed in the First Sino-Japanese War of 1895, in which the Qing lost its influence over Korea and the possession of Taiwan. New Armies were organized, but the ambitious Hundred Days' Reform of 1898 was turned back by Empress Dowager Cixi, a conservative leader. When the Scramble for Concessions by foreign powers triggered the violently anti-foreign Yihetuan (\"Boxers\"), the foreign powers invaded China, Cixi declared war on them, leading to defeat and the flight of the Imperial Court to Xi'an.\n\nAfter agreeing to sign the Boxer Protocol the government then initiated unprecedented fiscal and administrative reforms, including elections, a new legal code, and abolition of the examination system. Sun Yat-sen and other revolutionaries competed with reformist monarchists such as Kang Youwei and Liang Qichao to transform the Qing empire into a modern nation. After the deaths of Cixi and the Guangxu Emperor in 1908, the hardline Manchu court alienated reformers and local elites alike by obstructing social reform. The Wuchang Uprising on October 11, 1911, led to the Xinhai Revolution. General Yuan Shikai negotiated the abdication of Puyi, the last emperor, on February 12, 1912.\n\nNurhaci declared himself the \"Bright Khan\" of the \"Later Jin\" (lit. \"gold\") state in honor both of the 12–13th century Jurchen Jin dynasty and of his Aisin Gioro clan (\"Aisin\" being Manchu for the Chinese (\"jīn\", \"gold\")). His son Hong Taiji renamed the dynasty \"Great Qing\" in 1636. There are competing explanations on the meaning of \"Qīng\" (lit. \"clear\" or \"pure\"). The name may have been selected in reaction to the name of the Ming dynasty (), which consists of the Chinese characters for \"sun\" () and \"moon\" (), both associated with the fire element of the Chinese zodiacal system. The character \"Qīng\" () is composed of \"water\" () and \"azure\" (), both associated with the water element. This association would justify the Qing conquest as defeat of fire by water. The water imagery of the new name may also have had Buddhist overtones of perspicacity and enlightenment and connections with the Bodhisattva Manjusri. The Manchu name \"daicing\", which sounds like a phonetic rendering of \"Dà Qīng\" or \"Dai Ching\", may in fact have been derived from a Mongolian word that means \"warrior\". \"Daicing gurun\" may therefore have meant \"warrior state\", a pun that was only intelligible to Manchu and Mongol people. In the later part of the dynasty, however, even the Manchus themselves had forgotten this possible meaning.\n\nAfter conquering \"China proper\", the Manchus identified their state as \"China\" (中國, \"Zhōngguó\"; \"Middle Kingdom\"), and referred to it as \"Dulimbai Gurun\" in Manchu (\"Dulimbai\" means \"central\" or \"middle,\" \"gurun\" means \"nation\" or \"state\"). The emperors equated the lands of the Qing state (including present-day Northeast China, Xinjiang, Mongolia, Tibet and other areas) as \"China\" in both the Chinese and Manchu languages, defining China as a multi-ethnic state, and rejecting the idea that \"China\" only meant Han areas. The Qing emperors proclaimed that both Han and non-Han peoples were part of \"China\". They used both \"China\" and \"Qing\" to refer to their state in official documents, international treaties (as the Qing was known internationally as \"China\" or the \"Chinese Empire\") and foreign affairs, and \"Chinese language\" (\"Dulimbai gurun i bithe\") included Chinese, Manchu, and Mongol languages, and \"Chinese people\" (中國之人 \"Zhōngguó zhī rén\"; Manchu: \"Dulimbai gurun i niyalma\") referred to all subjects of the empire. In the Chinese-language versions of its treaties and its maps of the world, the Qing government used \"Qing\" and \"China\" interchangeably.\n\nThe Qing dynasty was founded not by Han Chinese, who constitute the majority of the Chinese population, but by a sedentary farming people known as the Jurchen, a Tungusic people who lived around the region now comprising the Chinese provinces of Jilin and Heilongjiang. The Manchus are sometimes mistaken for a nomadic people, which they were not. What was to become the Manchu state was founded by Nurhaci, the chieftain of a minor Jurchen tribethe Aisin Gioroin Jianzhou in the early 17th century. Originally a vassal of the Ming emperors, Nurhachi embarked on an intertribal feud in 1582 that escalated into a campaign to unify the nearby tribes. By 1616, he had sufficiently consolidated Jianzhou so as to be able to proclaim himself Khan of the Great Jin in reference to the previous Jurchen dynasty.\n\nTwo years later, Nurhachi announced the \"Seven Grievances\" and openly renounced the sovereignty of Ming overlordship in order to complete the unification of those Jurchen tribes still allied with the Ming emperor. After a series of successful battles, he relocated his capital from Hetu Ala to successively bigger captured Ming cities in Liaodong Peninsula: first Liaoyang in 1621, then Shenyang (Mukden) in 1625.\n\nRelocating his court from Jianzhou to Liaodong provided Nurhachi access to more resources; it also brought him in close contact with the Khorchin Mongol domains on the plains of Mongolia. Although by this time the once-united Mongol nation had long since fragmented into individual and hostile tribes, these tribes still presented a serious security threat to the Ming borders. Nurhachi's policy towards the Khorchins was to seek their friendship and cooperation against the Ming, securing his western border from a powerful potential enemy.\n\nFurthermore, the Khorchin proved a useful ally in the war, lending the Jurchens their expertise as cavalry archers. To guarantee this new alliance, Nurhachi initiated a policy of inter-marriages between the Jurchen and Khorchin nobilities, while those who resisted were met with military action. This is a typical example of Nurhachi's initiatives that eventually became official Qing government policy. During most of the Qing period, the Mongols gave military assistance to the Manchus.\n\nSome other important contributions by Nurhaci include ordering the creation of a written Manchu script, based on Mongolian script, after the earlier Jurchen script was forgotten (it had been derived from Khitan and Chinese). Nurhaci also created the civil and military administrative system that eventually evolved into the Eight Banners, the defining element of Manchu identity and the foundation for transforming the loosely knitted Jurchen tribes into a nation.\n\nThere were too few ethnic Manchus to conquer China, so they gained strength by defeating and absorbing Mongols. More importantly, they added Han Chinese to the Eight Banners. The Manchus had to create an entire \"Jiu Han jun\" (Old Han Army) due to the massive number of Han Chinese soldiers who were absorbed into the Eight Banners by both capture and defection. Ming artillery was responsible for many victories against the Manchus, so the Manchus established an artillery corps made out of Han Chinese soldiers in 1641, and the swelling of Han Chinese numbers in the Eight Banners led in 1642 to all Eight Han Banners being created. Armies of defected Ming Han Chinese conquered southern China for the Qing.\n\nHan defectors played a massive role in the Qing conquest of China. Han Chinese Generals who defected to the Manchu were often given women from the Imperial Aisin Gioro family in marriage while the ordinary soldiers who defected were often given non-royal Manchu women as wives. Jurchen (Manchu) women married Han Chinese defectors in Liaodong. Manchu Aisin Gioro princesses were also married to Han Chinese official's sons.\n\nThe unbroken series of military successes by Nurhaci came to an end in January 1626 when he was defeated by Yuan Chonghuan while laying siege to Ningyuan. He died a few months later and was succeeded by his eighth son, Hong Taiji, who emerged after a short political struggle amongst other potential contenders as the new Khan.\n\nAlthough Hong Taiji was an experienced leader and the commander of two Banners at the time of his succession, his reign did not start well on the military front. The Jurchens suffered yet another defeat in 1627 at the hands of Yuan Chonghuan. As before, this defeat was, in part, due to the Ming's newly acquired Portuguese cannons.\n\nTo redress the technological and numerical disparity, Hong Taiji in 1634 created his own artillery corps, the \"ujen chooha\" (Chinese: ) from among his existing Han troops who cast their own cannons in the European design with the help of defector Chinese metallurgists. In 1635, the Manchus' Mongol allies were fully incorporated into a separate Banner hierarchy under direct Manchu command. Hong Taiji then proceeded in 1636 to invade Korea again.\n\nAfter the Second Manchu invasion of Korea, Joseon Korea was forced to give several of their royal princesses as concubines to the Qing Manchu regent Prince Dorgon. In 1650, Dorgon married the Korean Princess I-shun (義/願).\n\nThis was followed by the creation of the first two Han Banners in 1637 (increasing to eight in 1642). Together these military reforms enabled Hong Taiji to resoundingly defeat Ming forces in a series of battles from 1640 to 1642 for the territories of Songshan and Jinzhou. This final victory resulted in the surrender of many of the Ming dynasty's most battle-hardened troops, the death of Yuan Chonghuan at the hands of the Chongzhen Emperor (who thought Yuan had betrayed him), and the complete and permanent withdrawal of the remaining Ming forces north of the Great Wall.\n\nMeanwhile, Hong Taiji set up a rudimentary bureaucratic system based on the Ming model. He established six boards or executive level ministries in 1631 to oversee finance, personnel, rites, military, punishments, and public works. However, these administrative organs had very little role initially, and it was not until the eve of completing the conquest ten years later that they fulfilled their government roles.\n\nHong Taiji's bureaucracy was staffed with many Han Chinese, including many newly surrendered Ming officials. The Manchus' continued dominance was ensured by an ethnic quota for top bureaucratic appointments. Hong Taiji's reign also saw a fundamental change of policy towards his Han Chinese subjects. Nurhaci had treated Han in Liaodong differently according to how much grain they had: those with less than 5 to 7 sin were treated like chattel while those with more than that amount were rewarded with property. Due to a revolt by Han in Liaodong in 1623, Nurhaci, who previously gave concessions to conquered Han subjects in Liaodong, turned against them and ordered that they no longer be trusted. He enacted discriminatory policies and killings against them, while ordering that Han who assimilated to the Jurchen (in Jilin) before 1619 be treated equally, as Jurchens were, and not like the conquered Han in Liaodong. Hong Taiji recognized that Han defectors were needed by the Manchus to assist in the conquest of the Ming, explaining to other Manchus why he needed to treat the Ming defector General Hong Chengchou leniently. Hong Taiji instead incorporated them into the Jurchen \"nation\" as full (if not first-class) citizens, obligated to provide military service. By 1648, less than one-sixth of the bannermen were of Manchu ancestry. This change of policy not only increased Hong Taiji's manpower and reduced his military dependence on banners not under his personal control, it also greatly encouraged other Han Chinese subjects of the Ming dynasty to surrender and accept Jurchen rule when they were defeated militarily. Through these and other measures Hong Taiji was able to centralize power unto the office of the Khan, which in the long run prevented the Jurchen federation from fragmenting after his death.\n\nOne of the defining events of Hong Taiji's reign was the official adoption of the name \"Manchu\" for the united Jurchen people in November 1635. The next year, when he was said to be presented with the imperial seal of the Yuan dynasty after the defeat of the last Khagan of the Mongols, Hong Taiji renamed his state from \"Great Jin\" to \"Great Qing\" and elevated his position from Khan to Emperor, suggesting imperial ambitions beyond unifying the Manchu territories.\n\nHong Taiji died suddenly in September 1643 without a designated heir. As the Jurchens had traditionally \"elected\" their leader through a council of nobles, the Qing state did not have in place a clear succession system until the reign of the Kangxi Emperor. The leading contenders for power at this time were Hong Taiji's oldest son Hooge and Hong Taiji' half brother Dorgon. A compromise candidate in the person of Hong Taiji's five-year-old son, Fulin, was installed as the Shunzhi Emperor, with Dorgon as regent and de facto leader of the Manchu nation.\n\nMing government officials fought against each other, against fiscal collapse, and against a series of peasant rebellions. They were unable to capitalise on the Manchu succession dispute and installation of a minor as emperor. In April 1644, the capital at Beijing was sacked by a coalition of rebel forces led by Li Zicheng, a former minor Ming official, who established a short-lived Shun dynasty. The last Ming ruler, the Chongzhen Emperor, committed suicide when the city fell, marking the official end of the dynasty.\n\nLi Zicheng then led a coalition of rebel forces numbering 200,000 to confront Wu Sangui, the general commanding the Ming garrison at Shanhai Pass. Shanhai Pass is a pivotal pass of the Great Wall, located fifty miles northeast of Beijing, and for years its defenses kept the Manchus from directly raiding the Ming capital. Wu Sangui, caught between a rebel army twice his size and a foreign enemy he had fought for years, decided to cast his lot with the Manchus, with whom he was familiar. Wu Sangui may have been influenced by Li Zicheng's mistreatment of his family and other wealthy and cultured officials; it was said that Li also took Wu's concubine Chen Yuanyuan for himself. Wu and Dorgon allied in the name of avenging the death of the Chongzhen Emperor. Together, the two former enemies met and defeated Li Zicheng's rebel forces in battle on May 27, 1644.\n\nThe newly allied armies captured Beijing on June 6. The Shunzhi Emperor was invested as the \"Son of Heaven\" on October 30. The Manchus, who had positioned themselves as political heir to the Ming emperor by defeating the rebel Li Zicheng, completed the symbolic transition by holding a formal funeral for the Chongzhen Emperor. However the process of conquering the rest of China took another seventeen years of battling Ming loyalists, pretenders and rebels. The last Ming pretender, Prince Gui, sought refuge with the King of Burma, but was turned over to a Qing expeditionary army commanded by Wu Sangui, who had him brought back to Yunnan province and executed in early 1662.\n\nHan Chinese Banners were made up of Han Chinese who defected to the Qing up to 1644 and joined the Eight Banners, giving them social and legal privileges in addition to being acculturated to Manchu culture. So many Han defected to the Qing and swelled the ranks of the Eight Banners that ethnic Manchus became a minority, making up only 16% in 1648, with Han Bannermen dominating at 75% and Mongol Bannermen making up the rest. This multi-ethnic force in which Manchus were only a minority conquered China for the Qing.\n\nHan Chinese Bannermen were responsible for the successful Qing conquest of China, as they made up the majority of governors in the early Qing, and they governed and administered China after the conquest, stabilizing Qing rule. Han Bannermen dominated the post of governor-general in the time of the Shunzhi and Kangxi Emperors, and also the post of governor, largely excluding ordinary Han civilians from these posts.\n\nThe Qing showed that the Manchus valued military skills in propaganda targeted towards the Ming military to get them to defect to the Qing, since the Ming civilian political system discriminated against the military. The three Liaodong Han Bannermen officers who played a massive role in the conquest of southern China from the Ming were Shang Kexi, Geng Zhongming, and Kong Youde and they governed southern China autonomously as viceroys for the Qing after their conquests. Normally the Manchu Bannermen acted only as reserve forces or in the rear and were used predominantly for quick strikes with maximum impact, so as to minimize ethnic Manchu losses; instead, the Qing used defected Han Chinese troops to fight as the vanguard during the entire conquest of China.\n\nAmong the Banners, gunpowder weapons like muskets and artillery were specifically wielded by the Chinese Banners.\n\nTo promote ethnic harmony, a 1648 decree from Shunzhi allowed Han Chinese civilian men to marry Manchu women from the Banners with the permission of the Board of Revenue if they were registered daughters of officials or commoners or the permission of their banner company captain if they were unregistered commoners, it was only later in the dynasty that these policies allowing intermarriage were done away with.\n\nThe southern cadet branch of Confucius' descendants who held the title Wujing boshi and the northern branch 65th generation descendant to hold the title Duke Yansheng had both their titles confirmed by the Qing Shunzhi Emperor upon the Qing conquest of the Ming and entry into Beijing on 31 October. The Kong's title of Duke was maintained by the Qing.\n\nThe first seven years of the Shunzhi Emperor's reign were dominated by the regent prince Dorgon. Because of his own political insecurity, Dorgon followed Hong Taiji's example by ruling in the name of the emperor at the expense of rival Manchu princes, many of whom he demoted or imprisoned under one pretext or another. Although the period of his regency was relatively short, Dorgon cast a long shadow over the Qing dynasty.\n\nFirst, the Manchus had entered \"China proper\" because Dorgon responded decisively to Wu Sangui's appeal. Then, after capturing Beijing, instead of sacking the city as the rebels had done, Dorgon insisted, over the protests of other Manchu princes, on making it the dynastic capital and reappointing most Ming officials. Choosing Beijing as the capital had not been a straightforward decision, since no major Chinese dynasty had directly taken over its immediate predecessor's capital. Keeping the Ming capital and bureaucracy intact helped quickly stabilize the regime and sped up the conquest of the rest of the country. Dorgon drastically reduced the influence of the eunuchs, a major force in the Ming bureaucracy, and directed Manchu women not to bind their feet in the Chinese style.\n\nHowever, not all of Dorgon's policies were equally popular nor easily implemented. The controversial July 1645 edict (the \"haircutting order\") forced adult Han Chinese men to shave the front of their heads and comb the remaining hair into the queue hairstyle which was worn by Manchu men, on pain of death. The popular description of the order was: \"To keep the hair, you lose the head; To keep your head, you cut the hair.\" To the Manchus, this policy was a test of loyalty and an aid in distinguishing friend from foe. For the Han Chinese, however, it was a humiliating reminder of Qing authority that challenged traditional Confucian values. The \"Classic of Filial Piety\" (\"Xiaojing\") held that \"a person's body and hair, being gifts from one's parents, are not to be damaged.\" Under the Ming dynasty, adult men did not cut their hair but instead wore it in the form of a top-knot. The order triggered strong resistance to Qing rule in Jiangnan and massive killing of Han Chinese. It was Han Chinese defectors who carried out massacres against people refusing to wear the queue. Li Chengdong, a Han Chinese general who had served the Ming but surrendered to the Qing, ordered his Han troops to carry out three separate massacres in the city of Jiading within a month, resulting in tens of thousands of deaths. At the end of the third massacre, there was hardly a living person left in this city. Jiangyin also held out against about 10,000 Han Chinese Qing troops for 83 days. When the city wall was finally breached on 9 October 1645, the Han Chinese Qing army led by the Han Chinese Ming defector Liu Liangzuo (劉良佐), who had been ordered to \"fill the city with corpses before you sheathe your swords,\" massacred the entire population, killing between 74,000 and 100,000 people. The queue was the only aspect of Manchu culture which the Qing forced on the common Han population. The Qing required people serving as officials to wear Manchu clothing, but allowed non-official Han civilians to continue wearing Hanfu (Han clothing).\n\nOn December 31, 1650, Dorgon suddenly died during a hunting expedition, marking the official start of the Shunzhi Emperor's personal rule. Because the emperor was only 12 years old at that time, most decisions were made on his behalf by his mother, Empress Dowager Xiaozhuang, who turned out to be a skilled political operator.\n\nAlthough his support had been essential to Shunzhi's ascent, Dorgon had centralised so much power in his hands as to become a direct threat to the throne. So much so that upon his death he was bestowed the extraordinary posthumous title of Emperor Yi (), the only instance in Qing history in which a Manchu \"prince of the blood\" () was so honored. Two months into Shunzhi's personal rule, however, Dorgon was not only stripped of his titles, but his corpse was disinterred and mutilated. to atone for multiple \"crimes\", one of which was persecuting to death Shunzhi's agnate eldest brother, Hooge. More importantly, Dorgon's symbolic fall from grace also led to the purge of his family and associates at court, thus reverting power back to the person of the emperor. After a promising start, Shunzhi's reign was cut short by his early death in 1661 at the age of twenty-four from smallpox. He was succeeded by his third son Xuanye, who reigned as the Kangxi Emperor.\n\nThe Manchus sent Han Bannermen to fight against Koxinga's Ming loyalists in Fujian. They removed the population from coastal areas in order to deprive Koxinga's Ming loyalists of resources. This led to a misunderstanding that Manchus were \"afraid of water\". Han Bannermen carried out the fighting and killing, casting doubt on the claim that fear of the water led to the coastal evacuation and ban on maritime activities. Even though a poem refers to the soldiers carrying out massacres in Fujian as \"barbarians\", both Han Green Standard Army and Han Bannermen were involved and carried out the worst slaughter. 400,000 Green Standard Army soldiers were used against the Three Feudatories in addition to the 200,000 Bannermen.\n\nThe sixty-one year reign of the Kangxi Emperor was the longest of any Chinese emperor. Kangxi's reign is also celebrated as the beginning of an era known as the \"High Qing\", during which the dynasty reached the zenith of its social, economic and military power. Kangxi's long reign started when he was eight years old upon the untimely demise of his father. To prevent a repeat of Dorgon's dictatorial monopolizing of power during the regency, the Shunzhi Emperor, on his deathbed, hastily appointed four senior cabinet ministers to govern on behalf of his young son. The four ministers – Sonin, Ebilun, Suksaha, and Oboi – were chosen for their long service, but also to counteract each other's influences. Most important, the four were not closely related to the imperial family and laid no claim to the throne. However, as time passed, through chance and machination, Oboi, the most junior of the four, achieved such political dominance as to be a potential threat. Even though Oboi's loyalty was never an issue, his personal arrogance and political conservatism led him into an escalating conflict with the young emperor. In 1669 Kangxi, through trickery, disarmed and imprisoned Oboi – a significant victory for a fifteen-year-old emperor over a wily politician and experienced commander.\n\nThe early Manchu rulers established two foundations of legitimacy which help to explain the stability of their dynasty. The first was the bureaucratic institutions and the neo-Confucian culture which they adopted from earlier dynasties. Manchu rulers and Han Chinese scholar-official elites gradually came to terms with each other. The examination system offered a path for ethnic Han to become officials. Imperial patronage of Kangxi Dictionary demonstrated respect for Confucian learning, while the Sacred Edict of 1670 effectively extolled Confucian family values. His attempts to discourage Chinese women from foot binding, however, were unsuccessful.\n\nThe second major source of stability was the Central Asian aspect of their Manchu identity which allowed them to appeal to Mongol, Tibetan and Uighur constituents. The Qing used the title of Emperor (Huangdi) in Chinese while among Mongols the Qing monarch was referred to as Bogda khan (wise Khan), and referred to as Gong Ma in Tibet. Qianlong propagated the image of himself as Buddhist sage rulers, patrons of Tibetan Buddhism. In the Manchu language, the Qing monarch was alternately referred to as either Huwangdi (Emperor) or Khan with no special distinction between the two usages. The Kangxi Emperor also welcomed to his court Jesuit missionaries, who had first come to China under the Ming. Missionaries including Tomás Pereira, Martino Martini, Johann Adam Schall von Bell, Ferdinand Verbiest and Antoine Thomas held significant positions as military weapons experts, mathematicians, cartographers, astronomers and advisers to the emperor. The relationship of trust was however lost in the later Chinese Rites controversy.\n\nYet controlling the \"Mandate of Heaven\" was a daunting task. The vastness of China's territory meant that there were only enough banner troops to garrison key cities forming the backbone of a defense network that relied heavily on surrendered Ming soldiers. In addition, three surrendered Ming generals were singled out for their contributions to the establishment of the Qing dynasty, ennobled as feudal princes (藩王), and given governorships over vast territories in Southern China. The chief of these was Wu Sangui, who was given the provinces of Yunnan and Guizhou, while generals Shang Kexi and Geng Jingzhong were given Guangdong and Fujian provinces respectively.\n\nAs the years went by, the three feudal lords and their extensive territories became increasingly autonomous. Finally, in 1673, Shang Kexi petitioned Kangxi for permission to retire to his hometown in Liaodong province and nominated his son as his successor. The young emperor granted his retirement, but denied the heredity of his fief. In reaction, the two other generals decided to petition for their own retirements to test Kangxi's resolve, thinking that he would not risk offending them. The move backfired as the young emperor called their bluff by accepting their requests and ordering that all three fiefdoms to be reverted to the crown.\n\nFaced with the stripping of their powers, Wu Sangui, later joined by Geng Zhongming and by Shang Kexi's son Shang Zhixin, felt they had no choice but to revolt. The ensuing Revolt of the Three Feudatories lasted for eight years. Wu attempted, ultimately in vain, to fire the embers of south China Ming loyalty by restoring Ming customs, ordering that the resented queues be cut, and declaring himself emperor of a new dynasty. At the peak of the rebels' fortunes, they extended their control as far north as the Yangtze River, nearly establishing a divided China. Wu then hesitated to go further north, not being able to coordinate strategy with his allies, and Kangxi was able to unify his forces for a counterattack led by a new generation of Manchu generals. By 1681, the Qing government had established control over a ravaged southern China which took several decades to recover.\n\nManchu Generals and Bannermen were initially put to shame by the better performance of the Han Chinese Green Standard Army. Kangxi accordingly assigned generals Sun Sike, Wang Jinbao, and Zhao Liangdong to crush the rebels, since he thought that Han Chinese were superior to Bannermen at battling other Han people. Similarly, in northwestern China against Wang Fuchen, the Qing used Han Chinese Green Standard Army soldiers and Han Chinese generals as the primary military forces. This choice was due to the rocky terrain, which favoured infantry troops over cavalry, to the desire to keep Bannermen in reserve, and, again, to the belief that Han troops were better at fighting other Han people. These Han generals achieved victory over the rebels. Also due to the mountainous terrain, Sichuan and southern Shaanxi were retaken by the Green Standard Army in 1680, with Manchus participating only in logistics and provisions. 400,000 Green Standard Army soldiers and 150,000 Bannermen served on the Qing side during the war. 213 Han Chinese Banner companies, and 527 companies of Mongol and Manchu Banners were mobilized by the Qing during the revolt. 400,000 Green Standard Army soldiers were used against the Three Feudatories besides 200,000 Bannermen.\n\nThe Qing forces were crushed by Wu from 1673–1674. The Qing had the support of the majority of Han Chinese soldiers and Han elite against the Three Feudatories, since they refused to join Wu Sangui in the revolt, while the Eight Banners and Manchu officers fared poorly against Wu Sangui, so the Qing responded with using a massive army of more than 900,000 Han Chinese (non-Banner) instead of the Eight Banners, to fight and crush the Three Feudatories. Wu Sangui's forces were crushed by the Green Standard Army, made out of defected Ming soldiers.\n\nTo extend and consolidate the dynasty's control in Central Asia, the Kangxi Emperor personally led a series of military campaigns against the Dzungars in Outer Mongolia. The Kangxi Emperor was able to successfully expel Galdan's invading forces from these regions, which were then incorporated into the empire. Galdan was eventually killed in the Dzungar–Qing War. In 1683, Qing forces received the surrender of Formosa (Taiwan) from Zheng Keshuang, grandson of Koxinga, who had conquered Taiwan from the Dutch colonists as a base against the Qing. Zheng Keshuang was awarded the title \"Duke Haicheng\" (海澄公) and was inducted into the Han Chinese Plain Red Banner of the Eight Banners when he moved to Beijing. Several Ming princes had accompanied Koxinga to Taiwan in 1661–1662, including the Prince of Ningjing Zhu Shugui and Prince Zhu Honghuan (朱弘桓), son of Zhu Yihai, where they lived in the Kingdom of Tungning. The Qing sent the 17 Ming princes still living on Taiwan in 1683 back to mainland China where they spent the rest of their lives in exile since their lives were spared from execution. Winning Taiwan freed Kangxi's forces for series of battles over Albazin, the far eastern outpost of the Tsardom of Russia. Zheng's former soldiers on Taiwan like the rattan shield troops were also inducted into the Eight Banners and used by the Qing against Russian Cossacks at Albazin. The 1689 Treaty of Nerchinsk was China's first formal treaty with a European power and kept the border peaceful for the better part of two centuries. After Galdan's death, his followers, as adherents to Tibetan Buddhism, attempted to control the choice of the next Dalai Lama. Kangxi dispatched two armies to Lhasa, the capital of Tibet, and installed a Dalai Lama sympathetic to the Qing.\n\nBy the end of the 17th century, China was at its greatest height of confidence and political control since the Ming dynasty.\n\nThe reigns of the Yongzheng Emperor (r. 1723–1735) and his son, the Qianlong Emperor (r. 1735–1796), marked the height of Qing power. During this period, the Qing Empire ruled over 13 million square kilometers of territory. Yet, as the historian Jonathan Spence puts it, the empire by the end of the Qianlong reign was \"like the sun at midday\". In the midst of \"many glories,\" he writes, \"signs of decay and even collapse were becoming apparent\".\n\nAfter the Kangxi Emperor's death in the winter of 1722, his fourth son, Prince Yong (雍親王), became the Yongzheng Emperor. In the later years of Kangxi's reign, Yongzheng and his brothers had fought, and there were rumours that he had usurped the throne(most of the rumours believe that Yongzheng's brother Yingzhen (Kangxi's 14th son) is the real successor of Kangxi Emperor, the reason why Yingzhen failed to sit on the throne is because Yongzheng and his confidant Keduo Long tampered the content of Kangxi's testament at the night when Kangxi died), a charge for which there is little evidence. In fact, his father had trusted him with delicate political issues and discussed state policy with him. When Yongzheng came to power at the age of 45, he felt a sense of urgency about the problems which had accumulated in his father's later years and did not need instruction in how to exercise power. In the words of one recent historian, he was \"severe, suspicious, and jealous, but extremely capable and resourceful\", and in the words of another, turned out to be an \"early modern state-maker of the first order\".\n\nHe moved rapidly. First, he promoted Confucian orthodoxy and reversed what he saw as his father's laxness by cracking down on unorthodox sects and by decapitating an anti-Manchu writer his father had pardoned. In 1723 he outlawed Christianity and expelled Christian missionaries, though some were allowed to remain in the capital. Next, he moved to control the government. He expanded his father's system of Palace Memorials which brought frank and detailed reports on local conditions directly to the throne without being intercepted by the bureaucracy, and created a small Grand Council of personal advisors which eventually grew into the emperor's \"de facto\" cabinet for the rest of the dynasty. He shrewdly filled key positions with Manchu and Han Chinese officials who depended on his patronage. When he began to realize that the financial crisis was even greater than he had thought, Yongzheng rejected his father's lenient approach to local landowning elites and mounted a campaign to enforce collection of the land tax. The increased revenues were to be used for \"money to nourish honesty\" among local officials and for local irrigation, schools, roads, and charity. Although these reforms were effective in the north, in the south and lower Yangzi valley, where Kangxi had wooed the elites, there were long established networks of officials and landowners. Yongzheng dispatched experienced Manchu commissioners to penetrate the thickets of falsified land registers and coded account books, but they were met with tricks, passivity, and even violence. The fiscal crisis persisted.\nIn 1725 Yongzheng bestowed the hereditary title of Marquis on a descendant of the Ming dynasty Imperial family, Zhu Zhiliang, who received a salary from the Qing government and whose duty was to perform rituals at the Ming tombs, and was also inducted into the Chinese Plain White Banner in the Eight Banners. Later the Qianlong Emperor bestowed the title Marquis of Extended Grace posthumously on Zhu Zhuliang in 1750, and the title passed on through twelve generations of Ming descendants until the end of the Qing dynasty.\n\nYongzheng also inherited diplomatic and strategic problems. A team made up entirely of Manchus drew up the Treaty of Kyakhta (1727) to solidify the diplomatic understanding with Russia. In exchange for territory and trading rights, the Qing would have a free hand dealing with the situation in Mongolia. Yongzheng then turned to that situation, where the Zunghars threatened to re-emerge, and to the southwest, where local Miao chieftains resisted Qing expansion. These campaigns drained the treasury but established the emperor's control of the military and military finance.\n\nThe Yongzheng Emperor died in 1735. His 24-year-old son, Prince Bao (寶親王), then became the Qianlong Emperor. Qianlong personally led military campaigns near Xinjiang and Mongolia, putting down revolts and uprisings in Sichuan and parts of southern China while expanding control over Tibet.\n\nQianlong's reign saw the launch of several ambitious cultural projects, including the compilation of the \"Siku Quanshu\", or \"Complete Repository of the Four Branches of Literature\". With a total of over 3,400 books, 79,000 chapters, and 36,304 volumes, the \"Siku Quanshu\" is the largest collection of books in Chinese history. Nevertheless, Qianlong used Literary Inquisition to silence opposition. The accusation of individuals began with the emperor's own interpretation of the true meaning of the corresponding words. If the emperor decided these were derogatory or cynical towards the dynasty, persecution would begin. Literary inquisition began with isolated cases at the time of Shunzhi and Kangxi, but became a pattern under Qianlong's rule, during which there were 53 cases of literary persecution.\n\nBeneath outward prosperity and imperial confidence, the later years of Qianlong's reign saw rampant corruption and neglect. Heshen, the emperor's handsome young favorite, took advantage of the emperor's indulgence to become one of the most corrupt officials in the history of the dynasty. Qianlong's son, the Jiaqing Emperor (r. 1796–1820), eventually forced Heshen to commit suicide.\n\nChina also began suffering from mounting overpopulation during this period. Population growth was stagnant for the first half of the 17th century due to civil wars and epidemics, but prosperity and internal stability gradually reversed this trend. The introduction of new crops from the Americas such as the potato and peanut allowed an improved food supply as well, so that the total population of China during the 18th century ballooned from 100 million to 300 million people. Soon all available farmland was used up, forcing peasants to work ever-smaller and more intensely worked plots. The Qianlong Emperor once bemoaned the country's situation by remarking \"The population continues to grow, but the land does not.\" The only remaining part of the empire that had arable farmland was Manchuria, where the provinces of Jilin and Heilongjiang had been walled off as a Manchu homeland. The emperor decreed for the first time that Han Chinese civilians were forbidden to settle. Mongols were forbidden by the Qing from crossing the borders of their banners, even into other Mongol Banners and from crossing into neidi (the Han Chinese 18 provinces) and were given serious punishments if they did in order to keep the Mongols divided against each other to benefit the Qing.\n\nDespite officially prohibiting Han Chinese settlement on the Manchu and Mongol lands, by the 18th century the Qing decided to settle Han refugees from northern China who were suffering from famine, floods, and drought into Manchuria and Inner Mongolia. Han Chinese both illegally and legally then streamed into Manchuria, over the Great Wall and Willow Palisade. As Manchu landlords desired Han Chinese to rent their land and grow grain, most Han Chinese migrants were not evicted. During the eighteenth century Han Chinese farmed 500,000 hectares of privately owned land in Manchuria and 203,583 hectares of lands that were part of courrier stations, noble estates, and Banner lands. In garrisons and towns in Manchuria Han Chinese made up 80% of the population.\n\nIn 1796, open rebellion by the White Lotus Society against the Qing government broke out. The White Lotus Rebellion continued for eight years, until 1804, and marked a turning point in the history of the Qing dynasty.\n\nAt the start of the dynasty, the Chinese empire continued to be the hegemonic power in East Asia. Although there was no formal ministry of foreign relations, the Lifan Yuan was responsible for relations with the Mongol and Tibetans in Central Asia, while the tributary system, a loose set of institutions and customs taken over from the Ming, in theory governed relations with East and Southeast Asian countries. The Treaty of Nerchinsk (1689) stabilized relations with Czarist Russia.\n\nHowever, the 18th century saw the European empires gradually expand across the world, as European states developed economies built on maritime trade. The dynasty was confronted with newly developing concepts of the international system and state to state relations. European trading posts expanded into territorial control in nearby India and on the islands that are now Indonesia. The Qing response, successful for a time, was in 1756 to establish the Canton System, which restricted maritime trade to that city (modern-day Guangzhou) and gave monopoly trading rights to private Chinese merchants. The British East India Company and the Dutch East India Company had long before been granted similar monopoly rights by their governments.\n\nIn 1793, the British East India Company, with the support of the British government, sent a delegation to China under Lord George Macartney in order to open free trade and put relations on a basis of equality. The imperial court viewed trade as of secondary interest, whereas the British saw maritime trade as the key to their economy. The Qianlong Emperor told Macartney \"the kings of the myriad nations come by land and sea with all sorts of precious things,\" and \"consequently there is nothing we lack...\"\nDemand in Europe for Chinese goods such as silk, tea, and ceramics could only be met if European companies funneled their limited supplies of silver into China. In the late 1700s, the governments of Britain and France were deeply concerned about the imbalance of trade and the drain of silver. To meet the growing Chinese demand for opium, the British East India Company greatly expanded its production in Bengal. Since China's economy was essentially self-sufficient, the country had little need to import goods or raw materials from the Europeans, so the usual way of payment was through silver. The Daoguang Emperor, concerned both over the outflow of silver and the damage that opium smoking was causing to his subjects, ordered Lin Zexu to end the opium trade. Lin confiscated the stocks of opium without compensation in 1839, leading Britain to send a military expedition the following year.\n\nThe First Opium War revealed the outdated state of the Chinese military. The Qing navy, composed entirely of wooden sailing junks, was severely outclassed by the modern tactics and firepower of the British Royal Navy. British soldiers, using advanced muskets and artillery, easily outmaneuvered and outgunned Qing forces in ground battles. The Qing surrender in 1842 marked a decisive, humiliating blow to China. The Treaty of Nanjing, the first of the unequal treaties, demanded war reparations, forced China to open up the Treaty Ports of Canton, Amoy, Fuchow, Ningpo and Shanghai to western trade and missionaries, and to cede Hong Kong Island to Britain. It revealed weaknesses in the Qing government and provoked rebellions against the regime. In 1842, the Qing dynasty fought a war to the Sikh Empire (the last independent kingdom of India), resulting in a negotiated peace and a return to the status quo ante bellum.\n\nThe Taiping Rebellion in the mid-19th century was the first major instance of anti-Manchu sentiment. Amid widespread social unrest and worsening famine, the rebellion not only posed the most serious threat towards Qing rulers, it has also been called the \"bloodiest civil war of all time\"; during its fourteen-year course from 1850 to 1864 between 20 and 30 million people died. Hong Xiuquan, a failed civil service candidate, in 1851 launched an uprising in Guizhou province, and established the Taiping Heavenly Kingdom with Hong himself as king. Hong announced that he had visions of God and that he was the brother of Jesus Christ. Slavery, concubinage, arranged marriage, opium smoking, footbinding, judicial torture, and the worship of idols were all banned. However, success led to internal feuds, defections and corruption. In addition, British and French troops, equipped with modern weapons, had come to the assistance of the Qing imperial army. It was not until 1864 that Qing armies under Zeng Guofan succeeded in crushing the revolt. After the outbreak of this rebellion, there were also revolts by the Muslims and Miao people of China against the Qing dynasty, most notably in the Miao Rebellion (1854–73) in Guizhou, the Panthay Rebellion (1856–1873) in Yunnan and the Dungan Revolt (1862–77) in the northwest.\n\nThe Western powers, largely unsatisfied with the Treaty of Nanjing, gave grudging support to the Qing government during the Taiping and Nian Rebellions. China's income fell sharply during the wars as vast areas of farmland were destroyed, millions of lives were lost, and countless armies were raised and equipped to fight the rebels. In 1854, Britain tried to re-negotiate the Treaty of Nanjing, inserting clauses allowing British commercial access to Chinese rivers and the creation of a permanent British embassy at Beijing.\n\nIn 1856, Qing authorities, in searching for a pirate, boarded a ship, the \"Arrow\", which the British claimed had been flying the British flag, an incident which led to the Second Opium War. In 1858, facing no other options, the Xianfeng Emperor agreed to the Treaty of Tientsin, which contained clauses deeply insulting to the Chinese, such as a demand that all official Chinese documents be written in English and a proviso granting British warships unlimited access to all navigable Chinese rivers.\n\nRatification of the treaty in the following year led to a resumption of hostilities and in 1860, with Anglo-French forces marching on Beijing, the emperor and his court fled the capital for the imperial hunting lodge at Rehe. Once in Beijing, the Anglo-French forces looted the Old Summer Palace and, in an act of revenge for the arrest of several Englishmen, burnt it to the ground. Prince Gong, a younger half-brother of the emperor, who had been left as his brother's proxy in the capital, was forced to sign the Convention of Beijing. Meanwhile, the humiliated emperor died in the following year at Rehe.\n\nYet the dynasty rallied. Chinese generals and officials such as Zuo Zongtang led the suppression of rebellions and stood behind the Manchus. When the Tongzhi Emperor came to the throne at the age of five in 1861, these officials rallied around him in what was called the Tongzhi Restoration. Their aim was to adopt western military technology in order to preserve Confucian values. Zeng Guofan, in alliance with Prince Gong, sponsored the rise of younger officials such as Li Hongzhang, who put the dynasty back on its feet financially and instituted the Self-Strengthening Movement. The reformers then proceeded with institutional reforms, including China's first unified ministry of foreign affairs, the Zongli Yamen; allowing foreign diplomats to reside in the capital; establishment of the Imperial Maritime Customs Service; the formation of modernized armies, such as the Beiyang Army, as well as a navy; and the purchase from Europeans of armament factories.\n\nThe dynasty lost control of peripheral territories bit by bit. In return for promises of support against the British and the French, the Russian Empire took large chunks of territory in the Northeast in 1860. The period of cooperation between the reformers and the European powers ended with the Tientsin Massacre of 1870, which was incited by the murder of French nuns set off by the belligerence of local French diplomats. Starting with the Cochinchina Campaign in 1858, France expanded control of Indochina. By 1883, France was in full control of the region and had reached the Chinese border. The Sino-French War began with a surprise attack by the French on the Chinese southern fleet at Fuzhou. After that the Chinese declared war on the French. A French invasion of Taiwan was halted and the French were defeated on land in Tonkin at the Battle of Bang Bo. However Japan threatened to enter the war against China due to the Gapsin Coup and China chose to end the war with negotiations. The war ended in 1885 with the Treaty of Tientsin (1885) and the Chinese recognition of the French protectorate in Vietnam.\n\nIn 1884, pro-Japanese Koreans in Seoul led the Gapsin Coup. Tensions between China and Japan rose after China intervened to suppress the uprising. Japanese Prime Minister Itō Hirobumi and Li Hongzhang signed the Convention of Tientsin, an agreement to withdraw troops simultaneously, but the First Sino-Japanese War of 1895 was a military humiliation. The Treaty of Shimonoseki recognized Korean independence and ceded Taiwan and the Pescadores to Japan. The terms might have been harsher, but when Japanese citizen attacked and wounded Li Hongzhang, an international outcry shamed the Japanese into revising them. The original agreement stipulated the cession of Liaodong Peninsula to Japan, but Russia, with its own designs on the territory, along with Germany and France, in what was known as the Triple Intervention, successfully put pressure on the Japanese to abandon the peninsula.\n\nThese years saw an evolution in the participation of Empress Dowager Cixi (Wade–Giles: Tz'u-Hsi) in state affairs. She entered the imperial palace in the 1850s as a concubine to the Xianfeng Emperor (r. 1850–1861) and came to power in 1861 after her five-year-old son, the Tongzhi Emperor ascended the throne. She, the Empress Dowager Ci'an (who had been Xianfeng's empress), and Prince Gong (a son of the Daoguang Emperor), staged a coup that ousted several regents for the boy emperor. Between 1861 and 1873, she and Ci'an served as regents, choosing the reign title \"Tongzhi\" (ruling together). Following the emperor's death in 1875, Cixi's nephew, the Guangxu Emperor, took the throne, in violation of the dynastic custom that the new emperor be of the next generation, and another regency began. In the spring of 1881, Ci'an suddenly died, aged only forty-three, leaving Cixi as sole regent.\n\nFrom 1889, when Guangxu began to rule in his own right, to 1898, the Empress Dowager lived in semi-retirement, spending the majority of the year at the Summer Palace. On November 1, 1897, two German Roman Catholic missionaries were murdered in the southern part of Shandong Province (the Juye Incident). Germany used the murders as a pretext for a naval occupation of Jiaozhou Bay. The occupation prompted a \"scramble for concessions\" in 1898, which included the German lease of Jiazhou Bay, the Russian acquisition of Liaodong, and the British lease of the New Territories of Hong Kong.\n\nIn the wake of these external defeats, the Guangxu Emperor initiated the Hundred Days' Reform of 1898. Newer, more radical advisers such as Kang Youwei were given positions of influence. The emperor issued a series of edicts and plans were made to reorganize the bureaucracy, restructure the school system, and appoint new officials. Opposition from the bureaucracy was immediate and intense. Although she had been involved in the initial reforms, the empress dowager stepped in to call them off, arrested and executed several reformers, and took over day-to-day control of policy. Yet many of the plans stayed in place, and the goals of reform were implanted.\n\nWidespread drought in North China, combined with the imperialist designs of European powers and the instability of the Qing government, created conditions that led to the emergence of the Righteous and Harmonious Fists, or \"Boxers.\" In 1900, local groups of Boxers proclaiming support for the Qing dynasty murdered foreign missionaries and large numbers of Chinese Christians, then converged on Beijing to besiege the Foreign Legation Quarter. A coalition of European, Japanese, and Russian armies (the Eight-Nation Alliance) then entered China without diplomatic notice, much less permission. Cixi declared war on all of these nations, only to lose control of Beijing after a short, but hard-fought campaign. She fled to Xi'an. The victorious allies drew up scores of demands on the Qing government, including compensation for their expenses in invading China and execution of complicit officials.\n\nBy the early 20th century, mass civil disorder had begun in China, and it was growing continuously. To overcome such problems, Empress Dowager Cixi issued an imperial edict in 1901 calling for reform proposals from the governors-general and governors and initiated the era of the dynasty's \"New Policies\", also known as the \"Late Qing Reform\". The edict paved the way for the most far-reaching reforms in terms of their social consequences, including the creation of a national education system and the abolition of the imperial examinations in 1905.\n\nThe Guangxu Emperor died on November 14, 1908, and on November 15, 1908, Cixi also died. Rumors held that she or Yuan Shikai ordered trusted eunuchs to poison the Guangxu Emperor, and an autopsy conducted nearly a century later confirmed lethal levels of arsenic in his corpse. Puyi, the oldest son of Zaifeng, Prince Chun, and nephew to the childless Guangxu Emperor, was appointed successor at the age of two, leaving Zaifeng with the regency. This was followed by the dismissal of General Yuan Shikai from his former positions of power. In April 1911 Zaifeng created a cabinet in which there were two vice-premiers. Nonetheless, this cabinet was also known by contemporaries as \"The Royal Cabinet\" because among the thirteen cabinet members, five were members of the imperial family or Aisin Gioro relatives. This brought a wide range of negative opinions from senior officials like Zhang Zhidong.\nThe Wuchang Uprising of October 10, 1911, led to the creation of a new central government, the Republic of China, in Nanjing with Sun Yat-sen as its provisional head. Many provinces soon began \"separating\" from Qing control. Seeing a desperate situation unfold, the Qing government brought Yuan Shikai back to military power. He took control of his Beiyang Army to crush the revolution in Wuhan at the Battle of Yangxia. After taking the position of Prime Minister and creating his own cabinet, Yuan Shikai went as far as to ask for the removal of Zaifeng from the regency. This removal later proceeded with directions from Empress Dowager Longyu.\n\nWith Zaifeng gone, Yuan Shikai and his Beiyang commanders effectively dominated Qing politics. He reasoned that going to war would be unreasonable and costly, especially when noting that the Qing government had a goal for constitutional monarchy. Similarly, Sun Yat-sen's government wanted a republican constitutional reform, both aiming for the benefit of China's economy and populace. With permission from Empress Dowager Longyu, Yuan Shikai began negotiating with Sun Yat-sen, who decided that his goal had been achieved in forming a republic, and that therefore he could allow Yuan to step into the position of President of the Republic of China.\n\nOn 12 February 1912, after rounds of negotiations, Longyu issued an imperial edict bringing about the abdication of the child emperor Puyi. This brought an end to over 2,000 years of Imperial China and began an extended period of instability of warlord factionalism. The unorganized political and economic systems combined with a widespread criticism of Chinese culture led to questioning and doubt about the future. In the 1930s, the Empire of Japan invaded Northeast China and founded Manchukuo in 1932, with Puyi, as the emperor. After the invasion by the Soviet Union, Manchukuo collapsed in 1945.\n\nThe early Qing emperors adopted the bureaucratic structures and institutions from the preceding Ming dynasty but split rule between Han Chinese and Manchus, with some positions also given to Mongols. Like previous dynasties, the Qing recruited officials via the imperial examination system, until the system was abolished in 1905. The Qing divided the positions into civil and military positions, each having nine grades or ranks, each subdivided into a and b categories. Civil appointments ranged from an attendant to the emperor or a Grand Secretary in the Forbidden City (highest) to being a prefectural tax collector, deputy jail warden, deputy police commissioner, or tax examiner. Military appointments ranged from being a field marshal or chamberlain of the imperial bodyguard to a third class sergeant, corporal or a first or second class private.\n\nThe formal structure of the Qing government centered on the Emperor as the absolute ruler, who presided over six Boards (Ministries), each headed by two presidents and assisted by four vice presidents. In contrast to the Ming system, however, Qing ethnic policy dictated that appointments were split between Manchu noblemen and Han officials who had passed the highest levels of the state examinations. The Grand Secretariat, which had been an important policy-making body under the Ming, lost its importance during the Qing and evolved into an imperial chancery. The institutions which had been inherited from the Ming formed the core of the Qing \"Outer Court,\" which handled routine matters and was located in the southern part of the Forbidden City.\n\nIn order not to let the routine administration take over the running of the empire, the Qing emperors made sure that all important matters were decided in the \"Inner Court,\" which was dominated by the imperial family and Manchu nobility and which was located in the northern part of the Forbidden City. The core institution of the inner court was the Grand Council. It emerged in the 1720s under the reign of the Yongzheng Emperor as a body charged with handling Qing military campaigns against the Mongols, but it soon took over other military and administrative duties and served to centralize authority under the crown. The Grand Councillors served as a sort of privy council to the emperor.\n\nThe Six Ministries and their respective areas of responsibilities were as follows:\n\nBoard of Civil Appointments\n\nBoard of Revenue\n\nBoard of Rites\n\nBoard of War\n\nBoard of Punishments\n\nBoard of Works\n\nFrom the early Qing, the central government was characterized by a system of dual appointments by which each position in the central government had a Manchu and a Han Chinese assigned to it. The Han Chinese appointee was required to do the substantive work and the Manchu to ensure Han loyalty to Qing rule. The distinction between Han Chinese and Manchus extended to their court costumes. During the Qianlong Emperor's reign, for example, members of his family were distinguished by garments with a small circular emblem on the back, whereas Han officials wore clothing with a square emblem.\n\nIn addition to the six boards, there was a Lifan Yuan unique to the Qing government. This institution was established to supervise the administration of Tibet and the Mongol lands. As the empire expanded, it took over administrative responsibility of all minority ethnic groups living in and around the empire, including early contacts with Russia – then seen as a tribute nation. The office had the status of a full ministry and was headed by officials of equal rank. However, appointees were at first restricted only to candidates of Manchu and Mongol ethnicity, until later open to Han Chinese as well.\n\nEven though the Board of Rites and Lifan Yuan performed some duties of a foreign office, they fell short of developing into a professional foreign service. It was not until 1861 – a year after losing the Second Opium War to the Anglo-French coalition – that the Qing government bowed to foreign pressure and created a proper foreign affairs office known as the Zongli Yamen. The office was originally intended to be temporary and was staffed by officials seconded from the Grand Council. However, as dealings with foreigners became increasingly complicated and frequent, the office grew in size and importance, aided by revenue from customs duties which came under its direct jurisdiction.\n\nThere was also another government institution called Imperial Household Department which was unique to the Qing dynasty. It was established before the fall of the Ming, but it became mature only after 1661, following the death of the Shunzhi Emperor and the accession of his son, the Kangxi Emperor. The department's original purpose was to manage the internal affairs of the imperial family and the activities of the inner palace (in which tasks it largely replaced eunuchs), but it also played an important role in Qing relations with Tibet and Mongolia, engaged in trading activities (jade, ginseng, salt, furs, etc.), managed textile factories in the Jiangnan region, and even published books. Relations with the Salt Superintendents and salt merchants, such as those at Yangzhou, were particularly lucrative, especially since they were direct, and did not go through absorptive layers of bureaucracy. The department was manned by \"booi\", or \"bondservants,\" from the Upper Three Banners. By the 19th century, it managed the activities of at least 56 subagencies.\n\nQing China reached its largest extent during the 18th century, when it ruled China proper (eighteen provinces) as well as the areas of present-day Northeast China, Inner Mongolia, Outer Mongolia, Xinjiang and Tibet, at approximately 13 million km in size. There were originally 18 provinces, all of which in China proper, but later this number was increased to 22, with Manchuria and Xinjiang being divided or turned into provinces. Taiwan, originally part of Fujian province, became a province of its own in the 19th century, but was ceded to the Empire of Japan following the First Sino-Japanese War by the end of the century. In addition, many surrounding countries, such as Korea (Joseon dynasty), Vietnam frequently paid tribute to China during much of this period. The Katoor dynasty of Afghanistan also paid tribute to the Qing dynasty of China until the mid-19th century. During the Qing dynasty the Chinese claimed suzerainty over the Taghdumbash Pamir in the south west of Tashkurgan Tajik Autonomous County but permitted the Mir of Hunza to administer the region in return for a tribute. Until 1937 the inhabitants paid tribute to the Mir of Hunza, who exercised control over the pastures. Khanate of Kokand were forced to submit as protectorate and pay tribute to the Qing dynasty in China between 1774 and 1798.\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\nThe Qing organization of provinces was based on the fifteen administrative units set up by the Ming dynasty, later made into eighteen provinces by splitting for example, Huguang into Hubei and Hunan provinces. The provincial bureaucracy continued the Yuan and Ming practice of three parallel lines, civil, military, and censorate, or surveillance. Each province was administered by a governor (, \"xunfu\") and a provincial military commander (, \"tidu\"). Below the province were prefectures (, \"fu\") operating under a prefect (, \"zhīfǔ\"), followed by subprefectures under a subprefect. The lowest unit was the county, overseen by a county magistrate. The eighteen provinces are also known as \"China proper\". The position of viceroy or governor-general (, \"zongdu\") was the highest rank in the provincial administration. There were eight regional viceroys in China proper, each usually took charge of two or three provinces. The Viceroy of Zhili, who was responsible for the area surrounding the capital Beijing, is usually considered as the most honorable and powerful viceroy among the eight.\n\n\nBy the mid-18th century, the Qing had successfully put outer regions such as Inner and Outer Mongolia, Tibet and Xinjiang under its control. Imperial commissioners and garrisons were sent to Mongolia and Tibet to oversee their affairs. These territories were also under supervision of a central government institution called Lifan Yuan. Qinghai was also put under direct control of the Qing court. Xinjiang, also known as Chinese Turkestan, was subdivided into the regions north and south of the Tian Shan mountains, also known today as Dzungaria and Tarim Basin respectively, but the post of Ili General was established in 1762 to exercise unified military and administrative jurisdiction over both regions. Dzungaria was fully opened to Han migration by the Qianlong Emperor from the beginning. Han migrants were at first forbidden from permanently settling in the Tarim Basin but were the ban was lifted after the invasion by Jahangir Khoja in the 1820s. Likewise, Manchuria was also governed by military generals until its division into provinces, though some areas of Xinjiang and Northeast China were lost to the Russian Empire in the mid-19th century. Manchuria was originally separated from China proper by the Inner Willow Palisade, a ditch and embankment planted with willows intended to restrict the movement of the Han Chinese, as the area was off-limits to civilian Han Chinese until the government started colonizing the area, especially since the 1860s.\n\nWith respect to these outer regions, the Qing maintained imperial control, with the emperor acting as Mongol khan, patron of Tibetan Buddhism and protector of Muslims. However, Qing policy changed with the establishment of Xinjiang province in 1884. During The Great Game era, taking advantage of the Dungan revolt in northwest China, Yaqub Beg invaded Xinjiang from Central Asia with support from the British Empire, and made himself the ruler of the kingdom of Kashgaria. The Qing court sent forces to defeat Yaqub Beg and Xinjiang was reconquered, and then the political system of China proper was formally applied onto Xinjiang. The Kumul Khanate, which was incorporated into the Qing empire as a vassal after helping Qing defeat the Zunghars in 1757, maintained its status after Xinjiang turned into a province through the end of the dynasty in the Xinhai Revolution up until 1930. In early 20th century, Britain sent an expedition force to Tibet and forced Tibetans to sign a treaty. The Qing court responded by asserting Chinese sovereignty over Tibet, resulting in the 1906 Anglo-Chinese Convention signed between Britain and China. The British agreed not to annex Tibetan territory or to interfere in the administration of Tibet, while China engaged not to permit any other foreign state to interfere with the territory or internal administration of Tibet. Furthermore, similar to Xinjiang which was converted into a province earlier, the Qing government also turned Manchuria into three provinces in the early 20th century, officially known as the \"Three Northeast Provinces\", and established the post of Viceroy of the Three Northeast Provinces to oversee these provinces, making the total number of regional viceroys to nine.\n\nThe early Qing military was rooted in the Eight Banners first developed by Nurhaci to organize Jurchen society beyond petty clan affiliations. There were eight banners in all, differentiated by color. The yellow, bordered yellow, and white banners were known as the \"Upper Three Banners\" and were under the direct command of the emperor. Only Manchus belonging to the Upper Three Banners, and selected Han Chinese who had passed the highest level of martial exams could serve as the emperor's personal bodyguards. The remaining Banners were known as the \"Lower Five Banners\". They were commanded by hereditary Manchu princes descended from Nurhachi's immediate family, known informally as the \"Iron cap princes\". Together they formed the ruling council of the Manchu nation as well as high command of the army. Nurhachi's son Hong Taiji expanded the system to include mirrored Mongol and Han Banners. After capturing Beijing in 1644, the relatively small Banner armies were further augmented by the Green Standard Army, made up of those Ming troops who had surrendered to the Qing, which eventually outnumbered Banner troops three to one. They maintained their Ming era organization and were led by a mix of Banner and Green Standard officers.\n\nBanner Armies were organized along ethnic lines, namely Manchu and Mongol, but included non-Manchu bondservants registered under the household of their Manchu masters. The years leading up to the conquest increased the number of Han Chinese under Manchu rule, leading Hong Taiji to create the , and around the time of the Qing takeover of Beijing, their numbers rapidly swelled. Han Bannermen held high status and power in the early Qing period, especially immediately after the conquest during Shunzhi and Kangxi's reign where they dominated Governor-Generalships and Governorships across China at the expense of both Manchu Bannermen and Han civilians. Han also numerically dominated the Banners up until the mid 18th century. European visitors in Beijing called them \"Tartarized Chinese\" or \"Tartarified Chinese\". \n\nThe Qianlong Emperor, concerned about maintaining Manchu identity, re-emphasized Manchu ethnicity, ancestry, language, and culture in the Eight Banners and started a mass discharge of Han Bannermen from the Eight Banners, either asking them to voluntarily resign from the Banner rolls or striking their names off. This led to a change from Han majority to a Manchu majority within the Banner system,\nand previous Han Bannermen garrisons in southern China such as at Fuzhou, Zhenjiang, Guangzhou, were replaced by Manchu Bannermen in the purge, which started in 1754. The turnover by Qianlong most heavily impacted Han banner garrisons stationed in the provinces while it less impacted Han Bannermen in Beijing, leaving a larger proportion of remaining Han Bannermen in Beijing than the provinces. Han Bannermen's status was decreased from that point on with Manchu Banners gaining higher status. Han Bannermen numbered 75% in 1648 Shunzhi's reign, 72% in 1723 Yongzheng's reign, but decreased to 43% in 1796 during the first year of Jiaqing's reign, which was after Qianlong's purge. The mass discharge was known as the . Qianlong directed most of his ire at those Han Bannermen descended from defectors who joined the Qing after the Qing passed through the Great Wall at Shanhai Pass in 1644, deeming their ancestors as traitors to the Ming and therefore untrustworthy, while retaining Han Bannermen who were descended from defectors who joined the Qing before 1644 in Liaodong and marched through Shanhai pass, also known as those who \"followed the Dragon through the pass\" ().\n\nAfter a century of peace the Manchu Banner troops lost their fighting edge. Before the conquest, the Manchu banner had been a \"citizen\" army whose members were farmers and herders obligated to provide military service in times of war. The decision to turn the banner troops into a professional force whose every need was met by the state brought wealth, corruption, and decline as a fighting force. The Green Standard Army declined in a similar way.\n\nEarly during the Taiping Rebellion, Qing forces suffered a series of disastrous defeats culminating in the loss of the regional capital city of Nanjing in 1853. Shortly thereafter, a Taiping expeditionary force penetrated as far north as the suburbs of Tianjin, the imperial heartlands. In desperation the Qing court ordered a Chinese official, Zeng Guofan, to organize regional and village militias into an emergency army called tuanlian. Zeng Guofan's strategy was to rely on local gentry to raise a new type of military organization from those provinces that the Taiping rebels directly threatened. This new force became known as the Xiang Army, named after the Hunan region where it was raised. The Xiang Army was a hybrid of local militia and a standing army. It was given professional training, but was paid for out of regional coffers and funds its commanders – mostly members of the Chinese gentry – could muster. The Xiang Army and its successor, the Huai Army, created by Zeng Guofan's colleague and mentee Li Hongzhang, were collectively called the \"Yong Ying\" (Brave Camp).\n\nZeng Guofan had no prior military experience. Being a classically educated official, he took his blueprint for the Xiang Army from the Ming general Qi Jiguang, who, because of the weakness of regular Ming troops, had decided to form his own \"private\" army to repel raiding Japanese pirates in the mid-16th century. Qi Jiguang's doctrine was based on Neo-Confucian ideas of binding troops' loyalty to their immediate superiors and also to the regions in which they were raised. Zeng Guofan's original intention for the Xiang Army was simply to eradicate the Taiping rebels. However, the success of the Yongying system led to its becoming a permanent regional force within the Qing military, which in the long run created problems for the beleaguered central government.\n\nFirst, the Yongying system signaled the end of Manchu dominance in Qing military establishment. Although the Banners and Green Standard armies lingered on as a drain on resources, henceforth the Yongying corps became the Qing government's de facto first-line troops. Second, the Yongying corps were financed through provincial coffers and were led by regional commanders, weakening central government's grip on the whole country. Finally, the nature of Yongying command structure fostered nepotism and cronyism amongst its commanders, who laid the seeds of regional warlordism in the first half of the 20th century.\n\nBy the late 19th century, the most conservative elements within the Qing court could no longer ignore China's military weakness. In 1860, during the Second Opium War, the capital Beijing was captured and the Summer Palace sacked by a relatively small Anglo-French coalition force numbering 25,000. The advent of modern weaponry resulting from the European Industrial Revolution had rendered China's traditionally trained and equipped army and navy obsolete. The government attempts to modernize during the Self-Strengthening Movement were initially successful, but yielded few lasting results because of the central government's lack of funds, lack of political will, and unwillingness to depart from tradition.\n\nLosing the First Sino-Japanese War of 1894–1895 was a watershed. Japan, a country long regarded by the Chinese as little more than an upstart nation of pirates, annihilated the Qing government's modernized Beiyang Fleet, then deemed to be the strongest naval force in Asia. The Japanese victory occurred a mere three decades after the Meiji Restoration set a feudal Japan on course to emulate the Western nations in their economic and technological achievements. Finally, in December 1894, the Qing government took concrete steps to reform military institutions and to re-train selected units in westernized drills, tactics and weaponry. These units were collectively called the New Army. The most successful of these was the Beiyang Army under the overall supervision and control of a former Huai Army commander, General Yuan Shikai, who used his position to build networks of loyal officers and eventually become President of the Republic of China.\n\nThe most significant fact of early and mid-Qing social history was population growth. The population doubled during the 18th century. People in this period were also remarkably on the move. There is evidence suggesting that the empire's rapidly expanding population was geographically mobile on a scale, which, in term of its volume and its protracted and routinized nature, was unprecedented in Chinese history. Indeed, the Qing government did far more to encourage mobility than to discourage it. Migration took several different forms, though might be divided in two varieties: permanent migration for resettlement, and relocation conceived by the party (in theory at least) as a temporary sojourn. Parties to the latter would include the empire's increasingly large and mobile manual workforce, as well as its densely overlapping internal diaspora of local-origin-based merchant groups. It would also included the patterned movement of Qing subjects overseas, largely to Southeastern Asia, in search of trade and other economic opportunities.\n\nAccording to statute, Qing society was divided into relatively closed estates, of which in most general terms there were five. Apart from the estates of the officials, the comparatively minuscule aristocracy, and the degree-holding literati, there also existed a major division among ordinary Chinese between commoners and people with inferior status. They were divided into two categories: one of them, the good \"commoner\" people, the other \"mean\" people. The majority of the population belonged to the first category and were described as \"liangmin\", a legal term meaning good people, as opposed to \"jianmin\" meaning the mean (or ignoble) people. Qing law explicitly stated that the traditional four occupational groups of scholars, farmers, artisans and merchants were \"good\", or having a status of commoners. On the other hand, slaves or bondservants, entertainers (including prostitutes and actors), and those low-level employees of government officials were the \"mean people\". Mean people were considered legally inferior to commoners and suffered unequal treatments, forbidden to take the imperial examination.\n\nAccording to one study, the homicide rate in Qing Chin \"ranged between 0.35 and 1.47 per 100,000 inhabitants during the 1661–1898 period, a low level unmatched by Western Europe until the late 19th century. China's homicide rate rose steadily from 1661 to 1821 but declined gradually thereafter until the turn of the century.\"\n\nBy the end of the 17th century, the Chinese economy had recovered from the devastation caused by the wars in which the Ming dynasty were overthrown, and the resulting breakdown of order. In the following century, markets continued to expand as in the late Ming period, but with more trade between regions, a greater dependence on overseas markets and a greatly increased population. After the re-opening of the southeast coast, which had been closed in the late 17th century, foreign trade was quickly re-established, and was expanding at 4% per annum throughout the latter part of the 18th century. China continued to export tea, silk and manufactures, creating a large, favorable trade balance with the West. The resulting inflow of silver expanded the money supply, facilitating the growth of competitive and stable markets.\n\nThe government broadened land ownership by returning land that had been sold to large landowners in the late Ming period by families unable to pay the land tax. To give people more incentives to participate in the market, they reduced the tax burden in comparison with the late Ming, and replaced the corvée system with a head tax used to hire laborers. The administration of the Grand Canal was made more efficient, and transport opened to private merchants. A system of monitoring grain prices eliminated severe shortages, and enabled the price of rice to rise slowly and smoothly through the 18th century. Wary of the power of wealthy merchants, Qing rulers limited their trading licenses and usually refused them permission to open new mines, except in poor areas. These restrictions on domestic resource exploration, as well as on foreign trade, are held by some scholars as a cause of the Great Divergence, by which the Western world overtook China economically.\n\nBy the end of the 18th century the population had risen to 300 million from approximately 150 million during the late Ming dynasty. The dramatic rise in population was due to several reasons, including the long period of peace and stability in the 18th century and the import of new crops China received from the Americas, including peanuts, sweet potatoes and maize. New species of rice from Southeast Asia led to a huge increase in production. Merchant guilds proliferated in all of the growing Chinese cities and often acquired great social and even political influence. Rich merchants with official connections built up huge fortunes and patronized literature, theater and the arts. Textile and handicraft production boomed.\n\nUnder the Qing, traditional forms of art flourished and innovations occurred at many levels and in many types. High levels of literacy, a successful publishing industry, prosperous cities, and the Confucian emphasis on cultivation all fed a lively and creative set of cultural fields.\n\nThe Qing emperors were generally adept at poetry and often skilled in painting, and offered their patronage to Confucian culture. The Kangxi and Qianlong Emperors, for instance, embraced Chinese traditions both to control them and to proclaim their own legitimacy. The Kangxi Emperor sponsored the \"Peiwen Yunfu\", a rhyme dictionary published in 1711, and the \"Kangxi Dictionary\" published in 1716, which remains to this day an authoritative reference. The Qianlong Emperor sponsored the largest collection of writings in Chinese history, the \"Siku Quanshu,\" completed in 1782. Court painters made new versions of the Song masterpiece, Zhang Zeduan's \"Along the River During the Qingming Festival\" whose depiction of a prosperous and happy realm demonstrated the beneficence of the emperor. The emperors undertook tours of the south and commissioned monumental scrolls to depict the grandeur of the occasion. Imperial patronage also encouraged the industrial production of ceramics and Chinese export porcelain. Peking glassware became popular after European glass making processes were introduced by Jesuits to Beijing.\n\nYet the most impressive aesthetic works were done among the scholars and urban elite. Calligraphy and painting remained a central interest to both court painters and scholar-gentry who considered the Four Arts part of their cultural identity and social standing. The painting of the early years of the dynasty included such painters as the orthodox Four Wangs and the individualists Bada Shanren (1626–1705) and Shitao (1641–1707). The nineteenth century saw such innovations as the Shanghai School and the Lingnan School which used the technical skills of tradition to set the stage for modern painting.\n\nTraditional learning flourished, especially among Ming loyalists such as Dai Zhen and Gu Yanwu, but scholars in the school of evidential learning made innovations in skeptical textual scholarship. Scholar-bureaucrats, including Lin Zexu and Wei Yuan, developed a school of practical statecraft which rooted bureaucratic reform and restructuring in classical philosophy.\n\nLiterature grew to new heights in the Qing period. Poetry continued as a mark of the cultivated gentleman, but women wrote in larger and larger numbers and came from all walks of life. The poetry of the Qing dynasty is a lively field of research, being studied (along with the poetry of the Ming dynasty) for its association with Chinese opera, developmental trends of Classical Chinese poetry, the transition to a greater role for vernacular language, and for poetry by women in Chinese culture. The Qing dynasty was a period of much literary collection and criticism, and many of the modern popular versions of Classical Chinese poems were transmitted through Qing dynasty anthologies, such as the \"Quantangshi\" and the \"Three Hundred Tang Poems\". Pu Songling brought the short story form to a new level in his \"Strange Stories from a Chinese Studio\", published in the mid-18th century, and Shen Fu demonstrated the charm of the informal memoir in \"Six Chapters of a Floating Life\", written in the early 19th century but published only in 1877. The art of the novel reached a pinnacle in Cao Xueqin's \"Dream of the Red Chamber\", but its combination of social commentary and psychological insight were echoed in highly skilled novels such as Wu Jingzi's \"The Scholars\" (1750) and Li Ruzhen's \"Flowers in the Mirror\" (1827).\n\nIn drama, Kong Shangren's Kunqu opera \"The Peach Blossom Fan\", completed in 1699, portrayed the tragic downfall of the Ming dynasty in romantic terms. The most prestigious form became the so-called Peking opera, though local and folk opera were also widely popular.\n\nCuisine aroused a cultural pride in the accumulated richness of a long and varied past. The gentleman gourmet, such as Yuan Mei, applied aesthetic standards to the art of cooking, eating, and appreciation of tea at a time when New World crops and products entered everyday life. The \"Suiyuan Shidan\" written by him, detailed the culinary esthetics and theory, along with a wide range of recipes from the ruling period of Qianlong during Qing Dynasty. The Manchu Han Imperial Feast originated at the court. Although this banquet was probably never common, it reflected an appreciation by Han Chinese for Manchu culinary customs. Nevertheless, culinary traditionalists such as Yuan Mei lambasted the opulent culinary rituals of the Manchu Han Imperial Feast, saying that it is cause in part by \"\"...the vulgar habits of bad chefs\"\" and that \"\"Display this trite are useful only for welcoming new relations through one's gates or when the boss comes to visit.\"\" (皆惡廚陋習。只可用之於新親上門，上司入境)\n\nBy the end of the nineteenth century, all elements of national artistic and cultural life had recognized and begun to come to terms with world culture as found in the West and Japan. Whether to stay within old forms or welcome Western models was now a conscious choice rather than an unchallenged acceptance of tradition. Classically trained Confucian scholars such as Liang Qichao and Wang Guowei broke ground later cultivated in the New Culture Movement.\n\n\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "25312", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25312", "title": "Quantum gravity", "text": "Quantum gravity\n\nQuantum gravity (QG) is a field of theoretical physics that seeks to describe gravity according to the principles of quantum mechanics, and where quantum effects cannot be ignored.\n\nThe current understanding of gravity is based on Albert Einstein's general theory of relativity, which is formulated within the framework of classical physics. On the other hand, the other three fundamental forces of physics are described within the framework of quantum mechanics and quantum field theory, radically different formalisms for describing physical phenomena. It is sometimes argued that a quantum mechanical description of gravity is necessary on the grounds that one cannot consistently couple a classical system to a quantum one. However, Robert Wald appeared to refute that by providing an explicit construction of a consistent semiclassical theory.\n\nWhile a quantum theory of gravity may be needed in order to reconcile general relativity with the principles of quantum mechanics, difficulties arise when one attempts to apply the usual prescriptions of quantum field theory to the force of gravity via graviton bosons. The problem is that the theory one gets in this way is not renormalizable and therefore cannot be used to make meaningful physical predictions. As a result, theorists have taken up more radical approaches to the problem of quantum gravity, the most popular approaches being string theory and loop quantum gravity.\n\nStrictly speaking, the aim of quantum gravity is only to describe the quantum behavior of the gravitational field and should not be confused with the objective of unifying all fundamental interactions into a single mathematical framework. While any substantial improvement into the present understanding of gravity would aid further work towards unification, study of quantum gravity is a field in its own right with various branches having different approaches to unification. Although some quantum gravity theories, such as string theory, try to unify gravity with the other fundamental forces, others, such as loop quantum gravity, make no such attempt; instead, they make an effort to quantize the gravitational field while it is kept separate from the other forces. A theory of quantum gravity that is also a grand unification of all known interactions is sometimes referred to as The Theory of Everything (TOE).\n\nOne of the difficulties of quantum gravity is that quantum gravitational effects are only expected to become apparent near the Planck scale, a scale far smaller in distance (equivalently, far larger in energy) than those currently accessible at high energy particle accelerators. As a result, quantum gravity is a mainly theoretical enterprise, although there are speculations about how quantum gravitational effects might be observed in existing experiments.\n\nMuch of the difficulty in meshing these theories at all energy scales comes from the different assumptions that these theories make on how the universe works. Quantum field theory, if conceived of as a theory of particles, depends on particle fields embedded in the flat space-time of special relativity. General relativity models gravity as a curvature within space-time that changes as a gravitational mass moves. Historically, the most obvious way of combining the two (such as treating gravity as simply another particle field) ran quickly into what is known as the renormalization problem. In the old-fashioned understanding of renormalization, gravity particles would attract each other and adding together all of the interactions results in many infinite values which cannot easily be cancelled out mathematically to yield sensible, finite results. This is in contrast with quantum electrodynamics where, given that the series still do not converge, the interactions sometimes evaluate to infinite results, but those are few enough in number to be removable via renormalization. Another possibility is to focus on fields rather than on particles, which are just one way of characterizing certain fields in very special spacetimes. This solves worries about consistency, but does not appear to lead to a quantized version of full general theory of relativity.\n\nQuantum gravity can be treated as an effective field theory. Effective quantum field theories come with some high-energy cutoff, beyond which we do not expect that the theory provides a good description of nature. The \"infinities\" then become large but finite quantities depending on this finite cutoff scale, and correspond to processes that involve very high energies near the fundamental cutoff. These quantities can then be absorbed into an infinite collection of coupling constants, and at energies well below the fundamental cutoff of the theory, to any desired precision; only a finite number of these coupling constants need to be measured in order to make legitimate quantum-mechanical predictions. This same logic works just as well for the highly successful theory of low-energy pions as for quantum gravity. Indeed, the first quantum-mechanical corrections to graviton-scattering and Newton's law of gravitation have been explicitly computed (although they are so infinitesimally small that we may never be able to measure them). In fact, gravity is in many ways a much better quantum field theory than the Standard Model, since it appears to be valid all the way up to its cutoff at the Planck scale.\n\nWhile confirming that quantum mechanics and gravity are indeed consistent at reasonable energies, it is clear that near or above the fundamental cutoff of our effective quantum theory of gravity (the cutoff is generally assumed to be of the order of the Planck scale), a new model of nature will be needed. Specifically, the problem of combining quantum mechanics and gravity becomes an issue only at very high energies, and may well require a totally new kind of model.\n\nThe general approach to deriving a quantum gravity theory that is valid at even the highest energy scales is to assume that such a theory will be simple and elegant and, accordingly, to study symmetries and other clues offered by current theories that might suggest ways to combine them into a comprehensive, unified theory. One problem with this approach is that it is unknown whether quantum gravity will actually conform to a simple and elegant theory, as it should resolve the dual conundrums of special relativity with regard to the uniformity of acceleration and gravity, and general relativity with regard to spacetime curvature.\n\nSuch a theory is required in order to understand problems involving the combination of very high energy and very small dimensions of space, such as the behavior of black holes, and the origin of the universe.\n\nAt present, one of the deepest problems in theoretical physics is harmonizing the theory of general relativity, which describes gravitation, and applications to large-scale structures (stars, planets, galaxies), with quantum mechanics, which describes the other three fundamental forces acting on the atomic scale. This problem must be put in the proper context, however. In particular, contrary to the popular claim that quantum mechanics and general relativity are fundamentally incompatible, one can demonstrate that the structure of general relativity essentially follows inevitably from the quantum mechanics of interacting theoretical spin-2 massless particles\n(called gravitons).\n\nWhile there is no concrete proof of the existence of gravitons, quantized theories of matter may necessitate their existence. Supporting this theory is the observation that all fundamental forces except gravity have one or more known messenger particles, leading researchers to believe that at least one most likely does exist; they have dubbed this hypothetical particle the \"graviton\". The predicted find would result in the classification of the graviton as a \"force particle\" similar to the photon of the electromagnetic field. Many of the accepted notions of a unified theory of physics since the 1970s assume, and to some degree depend upon, the existence of the graviton. These include string theory, superstring theory, M-theory, and loop quantum gravity. Detection of gravitons is thus vital to the validation of various lines of research to unify quantum mechanics and relativity theory.\n\nThe dilaton made its first appearance in Kaluza–Klein theory, a five-dimensional theory that combined gravitation and electromagnetism. Generally, it appears in string theory. More recently, however, it's become central to the lower-dimensional many-bodied gravity problem based on the field theoretic approach of Roman Jackiw. The impetus arose from the fact that complete analytical solutions for the metric of a covariant \"N\"-body system have proven elusive in general relativity. To simplify the problem, the number of dimensions was lowered to \"(1+1)\", i.e., one spatial dimension and one temporal dimension. This model problem, known as \"R=T\" theory (as opposed to the general \"G=T\" theory) was amenable to exact solutions in terms of a generalization of the Lambert W function. It was also found that the field equation governing the dilaton (derived from differential geometry) was the Schrödinger equation and consequently amenable to quantization.\n\nThus, one had a theory which combined gravity, quantization, and even the electromagnetic interaction, promising ingredients of a fundamental physical theory. It is worth noting that this outcome revealed a previously unknown and already existing \"natural link\" between general relativity and quantum mechanics. For some time, a generalization of this theory to \"(3+1)\" dimensions was unclear. However, a recent derivation in \"(3+1)\" dimensions under the right coordinate conditions yields a formulation similar to the earlier \"(1+1)\" namely a dilaton field governed by the logarithmic Schrödinger equation which is seen in condensed matter physics and superfluids. The field equations are indeed amenable to such a generalization (as shown with the inclusion of a one-graviton process) and yield the correct Newtonian limit in \"d\" dimensions but only if a dilaton is included. Furthermore, the results become even more tantalizing in view of the apparent resemblance between the dilaton and the Higgs boson. However, more experimentation is needed to resolve the relationship between these two particles. Since this theory can combine gravitational, electromagnetic and quantum effects, their coupling could potentially lead to a means of vindicating the theory, through cosmology and even, perhaps, experimentally.\n\nGeneral relativity, like electromagnetism, is a classical field theory. One might expect that, as with electromagnetism, the gravitational force should also have a corresponding quantum field theory.\n\nHowever, gravity is perturbatively nonrenormalizable. For a quantum field theory to be well-defined according to this understanding of the subject, it must be asymptotically free or asymptotically safe. The theory must be characterized by a choice of \"finitely many\" parameters, which could, in principle, be set by experiment. For example, in quantum electrodynamics these parameters are the charge and mass of the electron, as measured at a particular energy scale.\n\nOn the other hand, in quantizing gravity there are, in perturbation theory, \"infinitely many independent parameters\" (counterterm coefficients) needed to define the theory. For a given choice of those parameters, one could make sense of the theory, but since it's impossible to conduct infinite experiments to fix the values of every parameter, it has been argued that one does not, in perturbation theory, have a meaningful physical theory:\n\nIf we treat QG as an effective field theory, there is a way around this problem.\n\nThat is, the meaningful theory of quantum gravity (that makes sense and is predictive at all energy levels) inherently implies some deep principle that reduces the infinitely many unknown parameters to a finite number that can then be measured:\n\nIn an effective field theory, all but the first few of the infinite set of parameters in a non-renormalizable theory are suppressed by huge energy scales and hence can be neglected when computing low-energy effects. Thus, at least in the low-energy regime, the model is indeed a predictive quantum field theory. (A very similar situation occurs for the very similar effective field theory of low-energy pions.) Furthermore, many theorists agree that even the Standard Model should really be regarded as an effective field theory as well, with \"nonrenormalizable\" interactions suppressed by large energy scales and whose effects have consequently not been observed experimentally.\n\nRecent work has shown that by treating general relativity as an effective field theory, one can actually make legitimate predictions for quantum gravity, at least for low-energy phenomena. An example is the well-known calculation of the tiny first-order quantum-mechanical correction to the classical Newtonian gravitational potential between two masses.\n\nA fundamental lesson of general relativity is that there is no fixed spacetime background, as found in Newtonian mechanics and special relativity; the spacetime geometry is dynamic. While easy to grasp in principle, this is the hardest idea to understand about general relativity, and its consequences are profound and not fully explored, even at the classical level. To a certain extent, general relativity can be seen to be a relational theory, in which the only physically relevant information is the relationship between different events in space-time.\n\nOn the other hand, quantum mechanics has depended since its inception on a fixed background (non-dynamic) structure. In the case of quantum mechanics, it is time that is given and not dynamic, just as in Newtonian classical mechanics. In relativistic quantum field theory, just as in classical field theory, Minkowski spacetime is the fixed background of the theory.\n\nString theory can be seen as a generalization of quantum field theory where instead of point particles, string-like objects propagate in a fixed spacetime background, although the interactions among closed strings give rise to space-time in a dynamical way.\nAlthough string theory had its origins in the study of quark confinement and not of quantum gravity, it was soon discovered that the string spectrum contains the graviton, and that \"condensation\" of certain vibration modes of strings is equivalent to a modification of the original background. In this sense, string perturbation theory exhibits exactly the features one would expect of a perturbation theory that may exhibit a strong dependence on asymptotics (as seen, for example, in the AdS/CFT correspondence) which is a weak form of background dependence.\n\nLoop quantum gravity is the fruit of an effort to formulate a background-independent quantum theory.\n\nTopological quantum field theory provided an example of background-independent quantum theory, but with no local degrees of freedom, and only finitely many degrees of freedom globally. This is inadequate to describe gravity in 3+1 dimensions, which has local degrees of freedom according to general relativity. In 2+1 dimensions, however, gravity is a topological field theory, and it has been successfully quantized in several different ways, including spin networks.\n\nQuantum field theory on curved (non-Minkowskian) backgrounds, while not a full quantum theory of gravity, has shown many promising early results. In an analogous way to the development of quantum electrodynamics in the early part of the 20th century (when physicists considered quantum mechanics in classical electromagnetic fields), the consideration of quantum field theory on a curved background has led to predictions such as black hole radiation.\n\nPhenomena such as the Unruh effect, in which particles exist in certain accelerating frames but not in stationary ones, do not pose any difficulty when considered on a curved background (the Unruh effect occurs even in flat Minkowskian backgrounds). The vacuum state is the state with the least energy (and may or may not contain particles).\nSee Quantum field theory in curved spacetime for a more complete discussion.\n\nA conceptual difficulty in combining quantum mechanics with general relativity arises from the contrasting role of time within these two frameworks. In quantum theories time acts as an independent background through which states evolve, with the Hamiltonian operator acting as the generator of infinitesmal translations of quantum states through time. In contrast, general relativity treats time as a dynamical variable which interacts directly with matter and moreover requires the Hamiltonian constraint to vanish, removing any possibility of employing a notion of time similar to that in quantum theory.\n\nThere are a number of proposed quantum gravity theories. Currently, there is still no complete and consistent quantum theory of gravity, and the candidate models still need to overcome major formal and conceptual problems. They also face the common problem that, as yet, there is no way to put quantum gravity predictions to experimental tests, although there is hope for this to change as future data from cosmological observations and particle physics experiments becomes available.\n\nOne suggested starting point is ordinary quantum field theories which, after all, are successful in describing the other three basic fundamental forces in the context of the standard model of elementary particle physics. However, while this leads to an acceptable effective (quantum) field theory of gravity at low energies, gravity turns out to be much more problematic at higher energies. For ordinary field theories such as quantum electrodynamics, a technique known as renormalization is an integral part of deriving predictions which take into account higher-energy contributions, but gravity turns out to be nonrenormalizable: at high energies, applying the recipes of ordinary quantum field theory yields models that are devoid of all predictive power.\n\nOne attempt to overcome these limitations is to replace ordinary quantum field theory, which is based on the classical concept of a point particle, with a quantum theory of one-dimensional extended objects: string theory. At the energies reached in current experiments, these strings are indistinguishable from point-like particles, but, crucially, different modes of oscillation of one and the same type of fundamental string appear as particles with different (electric and other) charges. In this way, string theory promises to be a unified description of all particles and interactions. The theory is successful in that one mode will always correspond to a graviton, the messenger particle of gravity; however, the price of this success are unusual features such as six extra dimensions of space in addition to the usual three for space and one for time.\n\nIn what is called the , it was conjectured that both string theory and a unification of general relativity and supersymmetry known as supergravity form part of a hypothesized eleven-dimensional model known as M-theory, which would constitute a uniquely defined and consistent theory of quantum gravity. As presently understood, however, string theory admits a very large number (10 by some estimates) of consistent vacua, comprising the so-called \"string landscape\". Sorting through this large family of solutions remains a major challenge.\n\nLoop quantum gravity seriously considers general relativity's insight that spacetime is a dynamical field and is therefore a quantum object. Its second idea is that the quantum discreteness that determines the particle-like behavior of other field theories (for instance, the photons of the electromagnetic field) also affects the structure of space.\n\nThe main result of loop quantum gravity is the derivation of a granular structure of space at the Planck length. This is derived from following considerations: In the case of electromagnetism, the quantum operator representing the energy of each frequency of the field has a discrete spectrum. Thus the energy of each frequency is quantized, and the quanta are the photons. In the case of gravity, the operators representing the area and the volume of each surface or space region likewise have discrete spectrum. Thus area and volume of any portion of space are also quantized, where the quanta are elementary quanta of space. It follows, then, that spacetime has an elementary quantum granular structure at the Planck scale, which cuts off the ultraviolet infinities of quantum field theory.\n\nThe quantum state of spacetime is described in the theory by means of a mathematical structure called spin networks. Spin networks were initially introduced by Roger Penrose in abstract form, and later shown by Carlo Rovelli and Lee Smolin to derive naturally from a non-perturbative quantization of general relativity. Spin networks do not represent quantum states of a field in spacetime: they represent directly quantum states of spacetime.\n\nThe theory is based on the reformulation of general relativity known as Ashtekar variables, which represent geometric gravity using mathematical analogues of electric and magnetic fields.\nIn the quantum theory, space is represented by a network structure called a spin network, evolving over time in discrete steps.\n\nThe dynamics of the theory is today constructed in several versions. One version starts with the canonical quantization of general relativity. The analogue of the Schrödinger equation is a Wheeler–DeWitt equation, which can be defined within the theory.\nIn the covariant, or spinfoam formulation of the theory, the quantum dynamics is obtained via a sum over discrete versions of spacetime, called spinfoams. These represent histories of spin networks.\n\nThere are a number of other approaches to quantum gravity. The approaches differ depending on which features of general relativity and quantum theory are accepted unchanged, and which features are modified. Examples include:\n\nIn quantum field theory, the Weinberg–Witten theorem places some constraints on theories of composite gravity/emergent gravity. However, recent developments attempt to show that if locality is only approximate and the holographic principle is correct, the Weinberg–Witten theorem would not be valid.\n\nAs was emphasized above, quantum gravitational effects are extremely weak and therefore difficult to test. For this reason, the possibility of experimentally testing quantum gravity had not received much attention prior to the late 1990s. However, in the past decade, physicists have realized that evidence for quantum gravitational effects can guide the development of the theory. Since theoretical development has been slow, the field of phenomenological quantum gravity, which studies the possibility of experimental tests, has obtained increased attention.\n\nThe most widely pursued possibilities for quantum gravity phenomenology include violations of Lorentz invariance, imprints of quantum gravitational effects in the cosmic microwave background (in particular its polarization), and decoherence induced by fluctuations in the space-time foam.\n\nThe BICEP2 experiment detected what was initially thought to be primordial B-mode polarization caused by gravitational waves in the early universe. If truly primordial, these waves were born as quantum fluctuations in gravity itself. Cosmologist Ken Olum (Tufts University) stated: \"I think this is the only observational evidence that we have that actually shows that gravity is quantized...It's probably the only evidence of this that we will ever have.\"\n\n\n"}
